Cyborgs are kin, whelped in the litter of post–World War II information technologies and globalized digital bodies, politics, and cultures of human and not-human sorts. Cyborgs are not machines in just any sense, nor are they machine-organism hybrids. In fact, they are not hybrids at all. They are, rather, imploded entities, dense material semiotic “things”—articulated string figures of ontologically heterogeneous, historically situated, materially rich, virally proliferating relatings of particular sorts, not all the time everywhere, but here, there, and in between, with consequences. Particular sorts of historically situated machines signaled by the words information and system play their part in cyborg living and dying. Particular sorts of historically situated organisms, signaled by the idioms of labor systems, energetics, and communication, play their part. Finally, particular sorts of historically situated human beings, becoming-with the practices and artifacts of technoscience, play their part. Characterized by partial connections, the parts do not add up to any whole; but they do add up to worlds of nonoptional, stratified, webbed, and unfinished living and dying, appearing and disappearing. Cyborgs are constitutively full of multiscalar, multitemporal, multimaterial critters of both living and nonliving persuasions. Cyborgs matter in terran worlding. But cyborgs are critters in a queer litter, not the Chief Figure of Our Times. Queer here means not committed to reproduction of kind and having bumptious relations with futurities. Irreducible to cyborgs, the litter interests me, the particular kin and kind nursed on the fluid and solid effluvia of terra in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. I return to “my” cyborg in this litter in order to relay the string figures—the speculative fabulations, the scientific facts, the science fictions, and the speculative feminisms—to whatever sorts of tentacular grippers will receive the pattern to keep living and dying well possible in “our times.” Made up of an aging California dog, pregnant mares on the western Canadian prairies, human women who came to be known as des daughters, lots of menopausal U.S. women, and assorted other players in the story of “synthetic” and “natural” estrogens, the litter for this chapter is decanted from bodies awash in a particular pungent fluid—urine. Waste and resource, out-of-place urine from particular female bodies is the salty ocean needed for my tale. Leaks and eddies are everywhere. These leaks and eddies might help open passages for a praxis of care and response—response-ability—in ongoing multispecies worlding on a wounded terra. DES for Hot Peppers In October my twelve-year-old canine friend and lifelong sports partner Cayenne, aka Hot Pepper, started taking a notorious, industrially produced, nonsteroidal, synthetic estrogen called des (diethylstilbesterol) to deal with urinary leakage. Perhaps I should not write she “started taking,” but, rather, “I started feeding her as an occasional latenight treat, following her last pee, a luscious, slippery, Earth Balance® margarine-coated capsule of des.” Plato gave us the tones in the inextricable ambiguities of his pharmakon: cure and poison; care, curare; remedy, toxin; treat, threat. Aging spayed bitches like Cayenne and postmenopausal women like me often could use a hormonal tightening of slack smooth muscles in the urethra to keep socially unacceptable leaks plugged up. The term estrogen deficiency is a tough one for feminists like me, marinated at a young age in the women’s health movements and feminist science studies, to pronounce. But the fact is that a few extra dabs of estrogens do some handy jobs in aging mammalian female bodies—at a price, of course, in many currencies of living and dying. Granted, the adrenal glands still secrete some estrogens for those of us with missing or dried-up ovaries, but output is pretty low and smooth muscle can get pretty flaccid. But giving this beloved, elder, nonreproducing dog to whom I am responsible even very low-dose and infrequent diethylstilbesterol caused acute des Anxiety Syndrome in me. My blood pressure rose higher than the high canine blood pressure that motivated changing urine-plugging drugs for Cayenne in the first place. Even if I could keep my critique of biocapital in a sealed flask, my feminist biopolitical juices started oozing from every pore, leaking all over my obligations to our dog. Rusten, my male human spouse, was drawn deeply into this mammalian female well of worry, and not just because neither one of us much wanted to sleep in the urinary wet spot if estrogen-deprived urethral smooth muscle were left unattended in the nocturnal hours in our species-queer connubial bed. Cross-species kinship has consequences. Our now shared des Anxiety Syndrome had to be treated immediately by our excellent primary care veterinarian, who did the service of presenting us with scientific studies and her own history of practice with low-dose, minimumfrequency des for elder dogs; this was the “talking cure” we needed—a high dose of reason, evidence, and story, taken weekly with uncanny and unruly molecules. Still, my vet herself is too young to have been infected with my kind of terror of des. Besides, she can’t possibly be the daughter of a woman who took des sometime between and , when a report in the New England Journal of Medicine tied des to a nasty vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma in girls and young women who had been exposed to this drug in utero. Otherwise, my vet would surely do more than remember what I am afraid of. A talking cure might not be enough. Even though a double-blind study done at the University of Chicago in the early s showed no benefit from des for sustaining pregnancies in women, and even though by the late s six of seven leading human gynecological textbooks stated that des did not prevent miscarriages, the drug continued to be prescribed frequently over three decades for averting miscarriage and also for an almost comical (except it was not funny) host of other “indications,” both on and off label. Ultimately, probably million women in the United States alone took des during pregnancy. Probably every reader of this chapter knows some of the offspring of these pregnancies, but may or may not know their often hidden suffering. I do—both people and their suffering, or a little bit of it—and the extraordinary psychologist-scholar-friend who told me about her des history when I told her about Cayenne performed just the generative acts of “becoming-with” that have occupied my soul since writing When Species Meet, or really since the “Cyborg Manifesto.” My human friend, this human des daughter, was already an avid, if dogallergic, admirer of Cayenne; she is one of the humans who, when she visits, induces enthusiastic canine play-solicitation performances from my very nonpromiscuous dog. But suddenly and oddly, their unexpected des kinship threw them transversally, not genealogically, into a litter together differently. Separated by allergies, they were joined in the flesh by a disreputable nonsteroidal estrogen. It is clear to me that human Sheila has assigned herself to keep a baleful queer sisterly eye on those gelcaps I give dog Cayenne. That kindly critical lateral eye will complement the regular blood tests Cayenne will now have to endure to keep track of the health of her blood-forming cells and immune functions. A good sphincter can be hard to find. For very good reasons tied to the history of the women’s health movements and to action, finally, by agencies like the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, these days des is a controlled substance you can get only (or mainly) for nonhumans. In the s, the only approved indication for des in human beings was treatment of advanced prostate cancer in men and of advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women, and that use has been superseded. The last U.S. manufacturer of des, Eli Lilly, stopped making and marketing the no-longer-profitable drug in . That’s why Cayenne and I found ourselves at a homeopathic and compounding pharmacy in . Diethylstilbesterol was first synthesized in in a laboratory of the Oxford University in the waning heroic days of the history of endocrinology. Those were the days when one might still find eminent biochemists prowling around nonhuman animal slaughter floors collecting many pounds of ovaries, pancreas, testes, adrenal glands, kidneys, pituitaries (try collecting pounds or kilograms of pituitary gland!), and other organs and tissues from many species to ferret back to the lab to extract and then chemically and physiologically characterize the first few precious micrograms of natural steroids or other potent hormones. Stalking the newly dead in graves of the European Renaissance for human bodies to dissect has a long uncanny laboratory history into the present. Currentday laboratory mice and their archived and curated parts would probably be our best informants for today’s stories of organs without bodies and life after death. The s were still the days when biochemical laboratories were accustomed to distilling tiny amounts of chemical gold from the dross of vats of urine and other bodily fluids, human and not. des did not come from these material sources, but it inhabits the same cross-hatched histories, where what counts as natural or artificial was (and is) constantly morphing in the study and production of things called “sex hormones.” No wonder biologist feminists like me find our politics and psyches relentlessly and variously material in ways that Foucault hardly dreamed of. It’s those laboratory wet spots in nighttime knowledge making that get feminists roused. So in my town, you purchase the expensive, carcinogenic, immunesuppressing, anemia-inducing, smooth muscle–plumping molecules known as des in snowy powder form in gelcaps from a homeopathic and compounding pharmacy, Lauden Integrative Pharmacy. “Compounding pharmacy” sounds so early twentieth-century to my ear, but I can see that when Big Pharma no longer makes or sells a still useful molecule, one that is no better than she should be, the up-to-the-minute, seemingly old-fashioned drugstore gets the leavings. Lauden Integrative Pharmacy sells lots of homeopathic substances for both human and more-thanhuman animals. I paid for Cayenne’s des capsules at a counter draped in the colors, posters, and icons of “Western” and “Eastern” alternative medicine, both ancient and modern. To say this scene is emblematic of the mixed structures and affects of biomedical technoscience is an understatement. Lauden formulates many of the chemotherapeutic and other drugs prescribed by the veterinary specialist clinic where Cayenne and I were under the care of a fine consulting internist and cardiac specialist for her early mitral valve disease (mvd). mvd is the reason my fast and sporty Hot Pepper’s moderately high blood pressure was not acceptable, and so a new diagnosis of mvd is the reason we changed prescriptions from a drug she had gobbled happily for a few years, called Propolin® (ppa or phenylpropanolamine, “for oral use in dogs only”), to des. ppa does a fine job pumping up urethral smooth muscle and keeping urine in its hygienic reservoirs for properly timed release in assigned places. But unfortunately ppa is indiscriminate and tightens arterial smooth muscle too, thereby raising blood pressure—not a good idea in dogs with early heart disease. For better and for worse, estrogens are more discriminating in the tissues they home in on. Anyone with breasts—or breast cancer—knows this. But it’s the multispecies business in the compounding pharmacy that really drew my attention. When I get an anxiety syndrome, I am thrown into compulsive scholarly antics, and des Anxiety Syndrome was no exception. Urine, urethras, damaged heart valves, “abnormal pregnancy outcomes,” and cancer-ravaged breasts and uteruses have provided the cross-species organic stuff of the story. So far, my tale has emphasized a litter of critters made up of dogs, humans, and slaughtered animals, mainly pigs, sheep, and cows. It’s that last category that will take me into the last stanza of the des recitative and plump out the litter a bit before we get to my next starring estrogen molecules for remaking kin and kind. des was the molecule used in the first experimental, scientific demonstration of successful hormonal growth promotion in cattle in the history of those animal-human relations called agriculture. Although in researchers at Purdue University demonstrated des-induced growth promotion in heifers, Purdue did not pursue patent protection for the cattle and sheep work that its investigators carried out. These agricultural scientists used des because implants had already been formulated for use in poultry, those feathered workhorses in so much of the history of factory farming. The fda banned des for growth promotion in chickens and lambs in and in all animal feed in . But from to the early s des was used widely as a growth promoter in the beef industry. Agricultural industry and university agricultural science (especially Iowa State College) were close partners in research for this use. The agricultural-industrial complex was in its postwar adolescent growth spurt. Iowa State and W. Burroughs filed for a patent on oral des for cattle in , granted in . In the fda removed oral des from the market for use in cattle ( for implants). des residues found in bovine livers and human des daughters converged to take the drug off the legal agricultural market, although stories of illegal use still surface. But the core story here is not des as such; the big story is the relentless rise of hormonal growth promoters of the next molecular generations that are integral to the ecosystem-destroying, human and animal labortransforming, multispecies soul-mutilating, epidemic-friendly, corn monocrop-promoting, cross-species heartbreaking, feedlot cattle industries. All of a sudden, I cannot forget that in heifers too became des daughters, and the bovine sons followed in droves. Cyborg’s enhanced litter is outsized. Daughter of a dog family known for prowess in cattle herding before the times of des, my dog dribbling urine spots leads inAwash in Urine exorably to feedlots, slaughterhouses, and unmet agricultural animal, human, and ecological well-being and advocacy obligations around the world. Response-ability yet to come, again. In companion species worlding, becoming-with makes strong demands on the littermates. Conjugating Kin with Premarin Conjugating is about yoking together; conjugal love is yoked love; conjugated chemical compounds join together two or more constituents. People conjugate in public spaces; they yoke themselves together transversally and across time and space to make significant things happen. Students conjugate verbs to explore the yoked inflections of person, number, gender, kind, voice, mood, position, tense, and aspect in a field of material-semiotic meaning making. To learn about recursive yoking, conjugate “to conjugate.” Now, do that with estrogens. Conjunctivitis is an irritation of the mucous membrane lining the inner surface of the eyelid. What might conjunctivitis mean in the odoriferous fluid mixtures of conjugated estrogens, such as the motley of naturally occurring but nonhuman estrogens purified from pregnant mare’s urine to make very profitable pills for Big Pharma? And also to give lots of human women the means to decide whether or not they will bear children, endure hot flashes, lose bone mass, or add to or subtract from their risk of cancer or heart disease? Or, to find that “our bodies ourselves” includes mares and their foals (and a few stallions), with all the political and ethical consequences of that conjugation? Conjugated estrogens are about yoking molecules and species to each other in consequential ways. In the Moby Thesaurus, one mouth-watering synonym of conjugate is conglobulate; that is what I will try to do with horses, humans, urine, and hearts conjugated with Premarin. Once upon a time, when I thought I needed estrogen during menopause—to stave off familial heart disease, of all things—I relied on the animal-industrial complex, repeated pregnancies and long-term confinement of mares, and natural conjugated estrogens called Premarin (compounded with a progestin into hrt, Hormone Replacement Therapy) extracted from equine urine. Now I give my dog a synthetic estrogen with a terrible human and bovine history to control her urinary incontinence, for the sake of her heart—and her indoor way of life. (It works.) Oh, Cayenne, dog of my heart, a human taste for irony will not get us through these companion species relationships, these meals of situated molecules and required response-ability yet to come. Somehow, a feminist science studies scholar and lifelong animal lover, my menopausal self failed to know much about the pregnant mares and their disposable foals. Did I forget, never know, not look—or just not care? What kind of conjunctivitis was that? Social movements for animal flourishing had noticed those horses and made a very effective fuss about it, and these movements were full of feminist women and men. Why not me too? Was it only after it turned out that hrt probably harmed my heart rather than guarded it that the horses came into my ken? I don’t remember. Marx understood all about how privileged positions block knowledge of the conditions of one’s privilege. So did the innovators of feminist standpoint theory, the founders of the women’s health movements, and the thinkers and activists shaping movements for animal flourishing— that is, my friends, comrades, and colleagues—well before I was in menopause. Still, I managed not to know about the conditions of work for those adult horses for a very long time, much less know about the fate of the excess foals. I ate equine conjugated estrogens; I drank pooled mares’ urine, literally; but I did not conjugate well with the horses themselves. Shame is a prod to lifelong rethinking and recrafting one’s accountabilities! A collaboration between a Canadian pharmaceutical company and an endocrinologist at McGill University led to the development in of the first orally active, water-soluble, conjugated estrogen, called Emmenin®. Emmenin® was extracted from the urine of Canadian women in late stages of their pregnancies, but supply considerations set the researchers and company to looking for a more copious and available mammalian source. Even if they were paid and desperate, pregnant women would not stay attached to collection bags for long, nor did they pee nearly enough to supply their sisters with hormones. German researchers at the time were studying water-soluble estrogens in the urine of pregnant zebras and horses in the Berlin zoo, and by the pharmaceutical company Ayerst had established a method to get a stable concentrate from pregnant mares’ urine. The result of an extraction and concentration process with more than one hundred steps, Premarin was ready to be marketed in Canada in . The horses, confined in stalls for months at a time attached to collection bags, were originally contract workers on Quebec farms, and the product was manufactured in Montreal. Eventually, high demand issuing from the growing practice of prescribing hormones for menopause, coupled with the history of successive buyouts among the pharmaceutical companies, resulted in production moving to the expansive Canadian western prairies, with a new processing plant in Manitoba. About a decade after I started menopause in the late s, by Premarin became the number-one prescribed drug in the United States, reaching the sales figure of $ billion by . Used in over three thousand scientific investigations by , this drug complex remains the most studied estrogen therapy in the world. Definitively by , strong data gathered in the context of the Women’s Health Initiative showed that not only did estrogens not prevent heart disease; they were also positively correlated with increased incidences of blood clots, strokes, heart attack, and breast cancer. Sales of Premarin dropped fast—by a lot. Redundant equine workers went to slaughter—lots of them. Dependent contract farmers were put out of business. Drug companies scrambled. Women worried; I know. However reduced in volume, harvesting of pregnant mare urine remains a worldwide business, and Premarin remains a much-prescribed and profitable product. Today Pfizer, which bought out Wyeth-Ayerest in , contracts with about two dozen horse ranches, mainly in western Canada. In , there were over four hundred Wyeth-Ayerest contracted pmu farms in Manitoba. With industry reorganization in the wake of the crisis in Premarin prescriptions after , profit per pmu mare went up between and —a lot. The North American Equine Ranching Information Council (naeric) is a committed, sophisticated industry group that presents in its best light the history and contemporary practices of pmu farming. The naeric website includes a “four seasons” description, with beautiful pictures, of the annual life cycle of the horses on idyllic-looking farms said to be thoroughly regulated and inspected for animal welfare. This site narrates that, from autumn through early spring, mares are confined in their own “comfortable” stalls attached to a “lightweight, flexible pouch that is suspended from the ceiling by rubber suspension lines” that allow a full range of motion, including lying down. Horses have access to sufficient water— a major change from the period before reform, when the demand for concentrated urine trumped equine thirst, with predictable medical consequences for the horses. Put together by international veterinary and welfare groups which inspect equine ranches, and available online from the naeric site, the “Equine Veterinarians’ Consensus Report on the Care of Horses on pmu Ranches” concluded that numerous reforms after an investigation in led to major improvements in the lives of the horses. “The public should be assured that the care and welfare of the horses involved in the production of an estrogen replacement medication is good, and is closely monitored.” Onsite analysis on several farms by HorseAid in found conditions much less satisfactory than naeric claims, even if one grants that the guidelines, which leave the question of exercise to the discretion of pressed farmers with no indoor exercise facilities in a northern plains winter, are good enough for horses. Confined mares stand around too much, eat too much, get fat, and develop bad feet—sounds like a lot of working females across species to me. With very little room to make costly changes in care practices, contract farmers are at the low end of the financial food chain generated by pregnant mares’ urine, just as they are for broiler chickens or other animal industrial products. By , about naeric foals per year were born on twenty-six pmu farms, including draft, light horse, and sport breeds. The foals were sold mostly to families and show barns. About forty-nine thousand horses have been registered with naeric since . Better-bred foals are more profitable, so fewer are slaughtered or enter the rescue and adoption apparatus. These days, ranchers collecting pregnant mares’ urine “rely on selling foals as much as they rely upon the urine collected from the pregnant mares. Many of these farms utilize websites and forms of promotion identical to non-Premarin-related horse breeders, and, in nearly all ways, are indistinguishable from the average breeder of equines.” The reforms promoted by naeric came into being because of activist animal rights, women’s health, and horse advocacy groups. Beginning with a hands-on, on-site study in , HorseAid was the first animal rights organization to investigate conditions on pmu farms and the risks to women from hrt medication, publishing its damning results first in print in and then in on the Internet, with graphic images and details about farm and industry practices and human medical data. In , seven years after HorseAid’s report, naeric formed to advocate for reform and humane treatment of pmu horses. But reform was not and is not the ultimate goal for HorseAid or organizations like the International Fund for Horses. Both groups continue to argue for shutting down all pmu farming, where months-long confinement of pregnant horses, however “comfortable” (i.e., in a box feet wide by . feet wide by feet high for six months), and slaughtering mares who fail to become pregnant, continue. The availability of a wider range of laboratory-synthesized and plant-derived hormones makes arguments to end pmu production harder to evade. Taking account of all pmu farms in , HorseAid estimated that about fifteen thousand “excess” foals went to slaughter. Reflecting Premarin sales declines since , cuts in contracts to farms, and a more market-oriented foal production, the number now is much lower, but could be zero. HorseAid was always clear about its advocacy both for women’s health and the well-being of horses, and its reports also paid attention to the difficulties of farms and farmers in an agribusiness system in which making a living by farming has become brutal.That fact, of course, does not address what would make raising horses on the northern prairies viable for economic and ecological human-animal well-being, and that should not be an idle goal. Viral Response-ability There is no innocence in these kin stories, and the accountabilities are extensive and permanently unfinished. Indeed, responsibility in and for the worldings in play in these stories requires the cultivation of viral response-abilities, carrying meanings and materials across kinds in order to infect processes and practices that might yet ignite epidemics of multispecies recuperation and maybe even flourishing on terra in ordinary times and places. Call that utopia; call that inhabiting the despised places; call that touch; call that the rapidly mutating virus of hope, or the less rapidly changing commitment to staying with the trouble. My slogan from the s, “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival,” still resonates, in a cacophony of sound and fury emanating from a very big litter whelped in shared but nonmimetic suffering and issuing in movements for flourishing yet to come. In my des story, tracking Cayenne’s urine spots to out-of-the-way places brought us into a still-expanding conglobulation of interlinked research, marketing, medical and veterinary, activist, agricultural, and scholarly bodyand subject-making apparatuses. Digital and molecular species vied for attention with urethras and vaginas. Females in trouble seemed to luxuriate everywhere; even the industrially synthesized molecules seemed to respond to the lure of (always nonreproductive, in this story) sexual tropisms, despite decades of astute feminist wariness of so-called sex hormones. Cyborgs laughed. Do cyborgs get mitral valve disease or go through menopause? Of course they do, just like their kin. The relations of intimate care yoking together one woman and one dog rampaged virally into all sorts of publics. Sheer contagion. Companion species infect each other all the time. Bodily ethical and political obligations are infectious, or they should be. Before my dog and I could get out of the story, we were in the nonoptional company of—and accountable to—heifers in labs, beef cattle in feedlots, pregnant women in all sorts of places, daughters and sons and granddaughters and grandsons of once pregnant women, angry and well-informed women’s health movement activists, dogs with heart disease, and bevies of other spayed leaky bitches and their people in vet clinics and on beds. In my Premarin story, all the players seemed to be marinating in vats of Canadian equine urine, the only thing that seemed to hold together the virally exploding, vulnerable species of the tale. One registered trademark’s travels through bodies brought together, in the need to craft response-ability, quite a motley of mortal beings: fetal calves stripped of amniotic fluid, urinating pregnant Canadian women, pregnant mares and their foals and consorts in Manitoba and beyond, activists in horse rescue and women’s health, economically strapped contract farmers, a California menopausal woman worried about familial heart disease in the company of a lucrative market-ready crowd of other menopausal Americans, and German zebras in zoos in the s. Big Pharma, Big Agribusiness, and Big Science provided drama and villains aplenty, but also plenty of reason to damp down the certainty of villainy and explore the complexities of cyborg worlding. Each diner exposed to high risks of familial heart failure, eating dangerous and notorious estrogens in later life seems, finally, to be what here, in this tale, conjugates—yokes together—the cyborg author and the dog of her heart. Cum panis, companion species, females of two species (along with their microbiomes with species in the zillions) at table together, in different decades, slurping drafts of dubious estrogens in self-care and care of the other. Why tell stories like this, when there are only more and more openings and no bottom lines? Because there are quite definite response-abilities that are strengthened in such stories. It is no longer news that corporations, farms, clinics, labs, homes, sciences, technologies, and multispecies lives are entangled in multiscalar, multitemporal, multimaterial worlding; but the details matter. The details link actual beings to actual response-abilities. Each time a story helps me remember what I thought I knew, or introduces me to new knowledge, a muscle critical for caring about flourishing gets some aerobic exercise. Such exercise enhances collective thinking and movement too. Each time I trace a tangle and add a few threads that first seemed whimsical but turned out to be essential to the fabric, I get a bit straighter that staying with the trouble of complex worlding is the name of the game of living and dying well together on terra. Having eaten Premarin makes me more accountable to the well-being of ranchers, northern prairie ecologies, horses, activists, scientists, and women with breast cancer than I would otherwise be. Giving my dog des makes me accountable to histories and ongoing possibilities differently than if we never shaped kinships with the attachment sites of this molecule. Perhaps reading this chapter has consequences for response-ability too. We are all responsible to and for shaping conditions for multispecies flourishing in the face of terrible histories, but not in the same ways. The differences matter—in ecologies, economies, species, lives.