And then Camille came into our lives, rendering present the crossstitched generations of the not-yet-born and not-yet-hatched of vulnerable, coevolving species. Proposing a relay into uncertain futures, I end Staying with the Trouble with a story, a speculative fabulation, which starts from a writing workshop at Cerisy in summer , part of Isabelle Stengers’s colloquium on gestes spéculatifs. Gestated in sf writing practices, Camille is a keeper of memories in the flesh of worlds that may become habitable again. Camille is one of the children of compost who ripen in the earth to say no to the posthuman of every time. I signed up for the afternoon workshop at Cerisy called Narration Spéculative. The first day the organizers broke us down into writing groups of two or three participants and gave us a task. We were asked to fabulate a baby, and somehow to bring the infant through five human generations. In our times of surplus death of both individuals and of kinds, a mere five human generations can seem impossibly long to imagine flourishing with and for a renewed multispecies world. Over the week, the groups wrote many kinds of possible futures in a rambunctious play of literary forms. Versions abounded. Besides myself, the members of my group were the filmmaker Fabrizio Terranova and psychologist, philosopher, and ethologist Vinciane Despret. The version I tell here is itself a speculative gesture, both a memory and a lure for a “we” that came into being by fabulating a story together one summer in Normandy. I cannot tell exactly the same story that my cowriters would propose or remember. My story here is an ongoing speculative fabulation, not a conference report for the archives. We started writing together, and we have since written Camille stories individually, sometimes passing them back to the original writers for elaboration, sometimes not; and we have encountered Camille and the Children of Compost in other writing collaborations too. All the versions are necessary to Camille. My memoir for that workshop is an active casting of threads from and for ongoing, shared stories. Camille, Donna, Vinciane, and Fabrizio brought each other into copresence; we render each other capable. The Children of Compost insist that we need to write stories and live lives for flourishing and for abundance, especially in the teeth of rampaging destruction and impoverization. Anna Tsing urges us to cobble together the “arts of living on a damaged planet”; and among those arts are cultivating the capacity to reimagine wealth, learn practical healing rather than wholeness, and stitch together improbable collaborations without worrying overmuch about conventional ontological kinds. The Camille Stories are invitations to participate in a kind of genre fiction committed to strengthening ways to propose near futures, possible futures, and implausible but real nows. Every Camille Story that I write will make terrible political and ecological mistakes; and every story asks readers to practice generous suspicion by joining in the fray of inventing a bumptious crop of Children of Compost. Readers of science fiction are accustomed to the lively and irreverent arts of fan fiction. Story arcs and worlds are fodder for mutant transformations or for loving but perverse extensions. The Children of Compost invite not so much fan fiction as sym fiction, the genre of sympoiesis and symchthonia—the coming together of earthly ones. The Children of Compost want the Camille Stories to be a pilot project, a model, a work and play object, for composing collective projects, not just in the imagination but also in actual story writing. And on and under the ground. Vinciane, Fabrizio, and I felt a vital pressure to provide our baby with a name and a pathway into what was not yet but might be. We also felt a vital pressure to ask our baby to be part of learning, over five generations, to radically reduce the pressure of human numbers on earth, currently set on a course to climb to more than billion by the end of the twenty-first century ce. We could hardly approach the five generations through a story of heteronormative reproduction (to use the ugly but apt American feminist idiom)! More than a year later, I realized that Camille taught me how to say, “Make Kin Not Babies.” Immediately, however, as soon as we proposed the name of Camille to each other, we realized that we were now holding a squirming child who had no truck with conventional genders or with human exceptionalism. This was a child born for sympoiesis—for becoming-with and makingwith a motley clutch of earth others. Imagining the World of the Camilles Luckily, Camille came into being at a moment of an unexpected but powerful, interlaced, planetwide eruption of numerous communities of a few hundred people each, who felt moved to migrate to ruined places and work with human and nonhuman partners to heal these places, building networks, pathways, nodes, and webs of and for a newly habitable world. Only a portion of the earthwide, astonishing, and infectious action for well-being came from intentional, migratory communities like Camille’s. Drawing from long histories of creative resistance and generative living in even the worst circumstances, people everywhere found themselves profoundly tired of waiting for external, never materializing solutions to local and systemic problems. Both large and small individuals, organizations, and communities joined with each other, and with migrant communities like Camille’s, to reshape terran life for an epoch that could follow the deadly discontinuities of the Anthropocene, Capitalocene, and Plantationocene. In system-changing simultaneous waves and pulses, diverse indigenous peoples and all sorts of other laboring women, men, and children—who had been long subjected to devastating conditions of extraction and production in their lands, waters, homes, and travels—innovated and strengthened coalitions to recraft conditions of living and dying to enable flourishing in the present and in times to come. These eruptions of healing energy and activism were ignited by love of earth and its human and nonhuman beings and by rage at the rate and scope of extinctions, exterminations, genocides, and immiserations in enforced patterns of multispecies living and dying that threatened ongoingness for everybody. Love and rage contained the germs of partial healing even in the face of onrushing destruction. None of the Communities of Compost could imagine that they inhabited or moved to “empty land.” Such still powerful, destructive fictions of settler colonialism and religious revivalism, secular or not, were fiercely resisted. The Communities of Compost worked and played hard to understand how to inherit the layers upon layers of living and dying that infuse every place and every corridor. Unlike inhabitants in many other utopian movements, stories, or literatures in the history of the earth, the Children of Compost knew they could not deceive themselves that they could start from scratch. Precisely the opposite insight moved them; they asked and responded to the question of how to live in the ruins that were still inhabited, with ghosts and with the living too. Coming from every economic class, color, caste, religion, secularism, and region, members of the emerging diverse settlements around the earth lived by a few simple but transformative practices, which in turn lured—became vitally infectious for—many other peoples and communities, both migratory and stable. The communities diverged in their development with sympoietic creativity, but they remained tied together by sticky threads. The linking practices grew from the sense that healing and ongoingness in ruined places requires making kin in innovative ways. In the infectious new settlements, every new child must have at least three parents, who may or may not practice new or old genders. Corporeal differences, along with their fraught histories, are cherished. New children must be rare and precious, and they must have the robust company of other young and old ones of many kinds. Kin relations can be formed at any time in life, and so parents and other sorts of relatives can be added or invented at significant points of transition. Such relationships enact strong lifelong commitments and obligations of diverse kinds. Kin making as a means of reducing human numbers and demands on the earth, while simultaneously increasing human and other critters’ flourishing, engaged intense energies and passions in the dispersed emerging worlds. But kin making and rebalancing human numbers had to happen in risky embodied connections to places, corridors, histories, and ongoing decolonial and postcolonial struggles, and not in the abstract and not by external fiat. Many failed models of population control provided strong cautionary tales. Thus the work of these communities was and is intentional kin making across deep damage and significant difference. By the early twenty-first century, historical social action and cultural and scientific knowledges—much of it activated by anticolonial, antiracist, proqueer feminist movement—had seriously unraveled the once-imagined natural bonds of sex and gender and race and nation, but undoing the widespread destructive commitment to the still-conceived natural necessity of the tie between kin making and a treelike biogenetic reproductive genealogy became a key task for the Children of Compost. The decision to bring a new human infant into being is strongly structured to be a collective one for the emerging communities. Further, no one can be coerced to bear a child or punished for birthing one outside community auspices. The Children of Compost nurture the born ones every way they can, even as they work and play to mutate the apparatuses of kin making and to reduce radically the burdens of human numbers across the earth. Although discouraged in the form of individual decisions to make a new baby, reproductive freedom of the person is actively cherished. This freedom’s most treasured power is the right and obligation of the human person, of whatever gender, who is carrying a pregnancy to choose an animal symbiont for the new child. All new human members of the group who are born in the context of community decision making come into being as symbionts with critters of actively threatened spethe camille stories cies, and therefore with the whole patterned fabric of living and dying of those particular beings and all their associates, for whom the possibility of a future is very fragile. Human babies born through individual reproductive choice do not become biological symbionts, but they do live in many other kinds of sympoiesis with human and nonhuman critters. Over the generations, the Communities of Compost experienced complex difficulties with hierarchical caste formations and sometimes violent clashes between children born as symbionts and those born as more conventional human individuals. Syms and non-syms, sometimes literally, did not see eye to eye easily. The animal symbionts are generally members of migratory species, which critically shapes the lines of visiting, working, and playing for all the partners of the symbiosis. The members of the symbioses of the Children of Compost, human and nonhuman, travel or depend on associates that travel; corridors are essential to their being. The restoration and care of corridors, of connection, is a central task of the communities; it is how they imagine and practice repair of ruined lands and waters and their critters, human and not. The Children of Compost came to see their shared kind as humus, rather than as human or nonhuman. The core of each new child’s education is learning how to live in symbiosis so as to nurture the animal symbiont, and all the other beings the symbiont requires, into ongoingness for at least five human generations. Nurturing the animal symbiont also means being nurtured in turn, as well as inventing practices of care of the ramifying symbiotic selves. The human and animal symbionts keep the relays of mortal life going, both inheriting and inventing practices of recuperation, survival, and flourishing. Because the animal partners in the symbiosis are migratory, each human child learns and lives in nodes and pathways, with other people and their symbionts, in the alliances and collaborations needed to make ongoingness possible. Literally and figurally, training the mind to go visiting is a lifelong pedagogical practice in these communities. Together and separately, the sciences and arts are passionately practiced and enlarged as means to attune rapidly evolving ecological naturalcultural communities, including people, to live and die well throughout the dangerous centuries of irreversible climate change and continuing high rates of extinction and other troubles. A treasured power of individual freedom for the new child is to choose a gender—or not—when and if the patterns of living and dying evoke that desire. Bodily modifications are normal among Camille’s people; and at birth a few genes and a few microorganisms from the animal symbiont are added to the symchild’s bodily heritage, so that sensitivity and response to the world as experienced by the animal critter can be more vivid and precise for the human member of the team. The animal partners are not modified in these ways, although the ongoing relationships with lands, waters, people and peoples, critters, and apparatuses render them newly capable in surprising ways too, including ongoing EcoEvoDevo biological changes. Throughout life, the human person may adopt further bodily modifications for pleasure and aesthetics or for work, as long as the modifications tend to both symbionts’ wellbeing in the humus of sympoiesis. Camille’s people moved to southern West Virginia in the Appalachian Mountains on a site along the Kanawha River near Gauley Mountain, which had been devastated by mountaintop removal coal mining. The river and tributary creeks were toxic, the valleys filled with mine debris, the people used and abandoned by the coal companies. Camille’s people allied themselves with struggling multispecies communities in the rugged mountains and valleys, both the local people and the other critters. Most of the Communities of Compost that became most closely linked to Camille’s gathering lived in places ravaged by fossil fuel extraction or by mining of gold, uranium, or other metals. Places eviscerated by deforestation or agriculture practiced as water and nutrient mining and monocropping also figured large in Camille’s extended world. Monarch butterflies frequent Camille’s West Virginia community in the summers, and they undertake a many-thousand-mile migration south to overwinter in a few specific forests of pine and oyamel fir in central Mexico, along the border of the states of Michoacán and México. In the twentieth century, the monarch was declared the state insect of West Virginia; and the Sanctuarío de la Biosfera Mariposa Monarca (Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve), a unesco World Heritage Site after , was established in the ecoregion along the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt of surviving woodlands. Throughout their complex migrations, the monarchs must eat, breed, and rest in cities, ejidos, indigenous lands, farms, forests, and grasslands of a vast and damaged landscape, populated by people and peoples living and dying in many sorts of contested ecologies and economies. The larvae of the leap-frogging spring eastern monarch migrations from south to north face the consequences of genetic and chemical technologies of mass industrial agriculture that make their indispensable food—the leaves of native, local milkweeds—unavailable along most of the routes. Not just the presence of any milkweed, but the seasonal appearance of local milkweed varieties from Mexico to Canada, is syncopated in the flesh of monarch caterpillars. Some milkweed species flourish in disturbed land; they are good pioneer plants. The common milkweed of central and eastern North America, Asclepias syriaca, is such an early successional plant. Milkweeds thrive on roadsides and between crop furrows, and these are the milkweeds that are especially susceptible to herbicides like Monsanto’s glyphosphate-containing herbicide, Roundup. Another milkweed is also important to the eastern migration of monarchs, namely the climax prairie species native to grasslands in later successional stages. With the nearly complete destruction of climax prairies across North America, this milkweed, Asclepias meadii, is fiercely endangered. Throughout the spring, summer, and fall, a large variety of early, midseason, and late flowering plants, including milkweed blossoms, produce the nectar sucked greedily by monarch adults. On the southern journey to Mexico, the future of the North American eastern migration is threatened by loss of the habitats of nectar-producing plants to feed the nonbreeding adults flying to overwinter in their favorite roosting trees in mountain woodlands. These woodlands in turn face naturalcultural degradation in complex histories of ongoing state, class, and ethnic oppression of campesinos and indigenous peoples in the region, for example, the Mazahuas and Otomi. Unhinged in space and time and stripped of food in both directions, larvae starve and hungry adults grow sluggish and fail to reach their winter homes. Migrations fail across the Americas. The trees in central Mexico mourn the loss of their winter shimmying clusters, and the meadows, farms, and town gardens of the United States and southern Canada are desolate in summer without the flitting shimmer of orange and black. For the child’s symbionts, Camille ’s birthing parent chose monarch butterflies of North America, in two magnificent but severely damaged streams, from Canada to Mexico, and from the state of Washington, along California, and across the Rocky Mountains. Camille’s gestational parent exercised reproductive freedom with wild hope, choosing to bond the soon-to-be-born fetus with both the western and eastern currents of this braid of butterfly motion. That meant that Camille of the first generation, and further Camilles for four more human generations at least, would grow in knowledge and know-how committed to the on goingness of these gorgeous and threatened insects and their human and nonhuman communities all along the pathways and nodes of their migrations and residencies in these places and corridors, not all the time everywhere. Camille’s community understood that monarchs as a widespread global species are not threatened; but two grand currents of a continental migration, a vast connected sweep of myriad critters living and dying together, were on the brink of perishing. The child-bearing parent who chose the monarch butterfly as Camille’s symbiont was a single person with the response-ability to exercise potent, noninnocent, generative freedom that was pregnant with consequences for ramifying worlds across five generations. That irreducible singularity, that particular exercise of reproductive choice, set in train a severalhundred-year effort, involving many actors, to keep alive practices of migration across and along continents for all the migrations’ critters. The Communities of Compost did not align their children to “endangered species” as that term had been developed in conservation organizations in the twentieth century. Rather, the Communities of Compost understood their task to be to cultivate and invent the arts of living with and for damaged worlds in place, not as an abstraction or a type, but as and for those living and dying in ruined places. All the Camilles grew rich in worldly communities throughout life, as work and play with and for the butterflies made for intense residencies and active migrations with a host of people and other critters. As one Camille approached death, a new Camille would be born to the community in time so that the elder, as mentor in symbiosis, could teach the younger to be ready. The Camilles knew the work could fail at any time. The dangers remained intense. As a legacy of centuries of economic, cultural, and ecological exploitation both of people and other beings, excess extinctions and exterminations continued to stalk the earth. Still, successfully holding open space for other critters and their committed people also flourished, and multispecies partnerships of many kinds contributed to building a habitable earth in sustained troubled times. The Camille Stories The story I tell below tracks the five Camilles along only a few threads and knots of their lifeways, between the birth of Camille in and the death of Camille in . The story I tell here cries out for collaborative and divergent story-making practices, in narrative, audio, and visual performances and texts in materialities from digital to sculptural to everything practicable. My stories are suggestive string figures at best; they long for a fuller weave that still keeps the patterns open, with ramifying attachment sites for storytellers yet to come. I hope readers change parts of the story and take them elsewhere, enlarge, object, flesh out, and reimagine the lifeways of the Camilles. The Camille Stories reach only to five generations, not yet able to fulfill the obligations that the Haudenosaunee Confederacy imposed on themselves and so on anyone who has been touched by the account, even in acts of unacknowledged appropriation, namely, to act so as to be response-able to and for those in the seventh generation to come. The Children of Compost beyond the reach of the Camille Stories might become capable of that kind of worlding, which somehow once seemed possible, before the Great Acceleration of the Capitalocene and the Great Dithering. Over the five generations of the Camilles, the total number of human beings on earth, including persons in symbiosis with vulnerable animals chosen by their birth parent (syms) and those not in such symbioses (non-syms), declined from the high point of billion in to a stable level of billion by . If the Communities of Compost had not proved from their earliest years so successful and so infectious among other human people and peoples, the earth’s population would have reached more than billion by . The breathing room provided by that difference of a billion human people opened up possibilities for ongoingness for many threatened ways of living and dying for both human and nonhuman beings. CAMILLE Born . Human numbers are billion. Died . Human numbers are billion. In , about three hundred people with diverse class, racial, religious, and regional heritages, including two hundred adults of the four major genders practiced at the time and one hundred children under the age of eighteen, built a town where the New River and Gauley River flowed together to form the Kanawha River in West Virginia. They named the settlement New Gauley to honor the lands and waters devastated by mountaintop removal coal mining. Historians of this time have suggested that the period between about and on earth should be called the Great Dithering. The Great Dithering was a time of ineffective and widespread anxiety about environmental destruction, unmistakable evidence of accelerating mass extinctions, violent climate change, social disintegration, widening wars, ongoing human population increase due to the large numbers of already-born youngsters (even though birth rates most places had fallen below replacement rate), and vast migrations of human and nonhuman refugees without refuges. During this terrible period, when it was nonetheless still possible for concerted action to make a difference, numerous communities emerged across the earth. The English-language name for these gatherings was the Communities of Compost; the people called themselves compostists. Many other names in many languages also proposed the string figure game of collective resurgence. These communities understood that the Great Dithering could end in terminal crises; or radical collective action could ferment a turbulent but generative time of reversals, revolt, revolution, and resurgence. For the first few years, the adults of New Gauley did not birth any new children, but concentrated on building culture, economy, rituals, and politics in which oddkin would be abundant, and children would be rare but precious. The kin-making work and play of the community built capacities critical for resurgence and multispecies flourishing. In particular, friendship as a kin-making practice throughout life was elaborated and celebrated. In , the community felt ready to birth their first new babies to be bonded with animal symbionts. The adults judged that most of their already-born children, who had helped found the community, were ready and eager to be older siblings to the coming symbiont youngsters. Everybody believed that this kind of sympoiesis had not been practiced anywhere on earth before. People knew it would not be simple to learn to live collectively in intimate and worldly caretaking symbiosis with another animal as a practice of repairing damaged places and making flourishing multispecies futures. Camille was born among a small group of five children, and per was the only youngster linked to an insect. Other children in this first cohort became symbionts with fish (American eel, Anguilla rostrata), birds (American kestrel, Falco sparverius), crustaceans (the Big Sandy crayfish, Cambarus veteranus), and amphibians (streamside salamander, Ambystoma barbouri). Beginning with vulnerable bats, mammal symbioses were undertaken in the second wave of births about five years later. It was often easier to identify migratory threatened insects, fish, mammals, and birds as potential symbionts for new children than reptiles, amphibians, and crustaceans. The preference for migratory symbionts was often relaxed, especially since corridor conservation of all kinds was ever more urgent as rising temperatures due to climate change forced many usually nonmigratory species outside their previous ranges. Although their first loves remained traveling critters and far-flung pathways—mostly because their own small human communities were made geographically and culturally more worldly through cultivating the linkages required to take care of their partners in symbiosis—some members of the Communities of Compost committed themselves to critters in tiny remnant habitats, as well as to those whose finicky ecological requirements and love of home tied them tightly to particular places only. Over the first hundred years, New Gauley welcomed new births with babies joined to animal symbionts, births to single parents or couples who declined the three-parent model and whose offspring did not receive these sorts of symbionts, deaths, in-migrants, and out-migrants. The scientists of the Communities of Compost found it impossible to establish successful animal-human symbioses with adults; the critical receptive times for humans were fetal development, nursing, and adolescence. During the times that they contributed cellular or molecular materials for modifying the human partner, the animal partners also had to be in a period of transformation, such as hatching, larval ecdysis, or metamorphosis. The animals themselves were not modified with human material; their roles in the symbioses were to teach and to flourish in every way possible in dangerous and damaged times. Almost everywhere, the Communities of Compost committed themselves to maintaining their size or to growing through immigration, while keeping their own new births at a level compatible with the earth’s overall human numbers eventually declining by two-thirds. If new inmigrants accepted the basic practices of the Communities of Compost, upon request they received permanent residency and citizenship rights as compostists in inventive and usually raucous kin-making ceremonies. Nonresident visitors were always welcome; hospitality was regarded as both a basic obligation and source of mutual renewal. Visitors’ lengths of stay could become a contentious matter and was even known to break up kin affiliations and sometimes entire compostist communities. If many more in-migrants wanted to join Communities of Compost than were possible to accommodate, new settlements formed with mentors from the seed towns. In-migrants in the early centuries often came from ruined areas elsewhere, and their seeking both refuge and belonging in the Communities of Compost—themselves committed to the arts of living in damaged places—was an act of both desperation and faith. The original founders of the Communities of Compost quickly realized that in-migrants from desperate situations brought with them not only trauma, but also extraordinary insight and skill for the work to be done. Resettlement in still other ruined sites and establishment of alliances and collaborations with people and other critters in those areas required the best abilities of the mentors and the in-migrants. Plant symbionts were not joined to babies in the Communities of Compost for several generations, although recognizing profuse sympoiesis—world making— with plants was fundamental for all compostists. New Gauley decided to emphasize in-migration of people over new births for the first three generations, and after that time there was both more flexibility and the need to recalibrate births and deaths. Inand out-migration tended to equalize as more places on earth restored conditions for modest resurgence and reasons for seeking new homes rested much less on war, exploitation, genocide, and ecological devastation, and much more on adventure, curiosity, desire for new kinds of abundance and skill, and the old habits of human beings to move, including hunter-gatherers, pastoralists, and farm-and-town-living people. Opportunistic social species tend to move around a lot; human beings outside captivity have always been extraordinary ecosocial opportunists, travelers, and path makers. Added to that, by , more than a billion human beings on earth had themselves been born into new kinds of symbiotic relationships with other critters, in addition to the much older multispecies associations that characterized human people as well as every other sort of living being throughout ecological, evolutionary, developmental, historical, and technological histories. Before birth, Camille was given a suite of pattern-forming genes expressed on monarch surfaces over their transformations from caterpillar to winged adult. Camille also received genes allowing per to taste in the wind the dilute chemical signals crucial to adult monarchs selecting diverse nectar-rich flowers and the best milkweed leaves for depositing their eggs. Camille ’s gut and mouth microbiomes were enhanced to allow per to safely savor milkweed plants containing the toxic alkaloids that the monarchs accumulate in their flesh to deter predators. As an infant, Camille ’s oral satisfactions with fragrant mammalian milk were laced with the bitter tastes of cardiac glycosides, tastes that the human parent nursing per dared not share. In per’s maturing mindful body, Camille had to learn to become in symbiosis with an insect composed as five caterpillar instars before metamorphosis into a flying adult, which in turn experienced seasonally alternating sexually excited phases and sexually quiet diapause. The symbiogenetic join of Camille and monarchs also had to accommodate the diverse parasitic and beneficial associates of the butterfly holobiont, as well as pay attention to the genetics of the migrating populations. The compostists did not attempt to introduce into Camille ’s already complicated symbiotic reformatting any of the genes and timing patterns that the butterflies use to utterly disassemble and recompose their entire being in the chrysalis before emerging as winged imagos. Nor did the parents attempt to alter Camille’s visual capacities and neural arrangements to perceive physically in the butterfly color spectrum, or to see as if Camille had the compound eyes of an insect. Mimesis was not the point of the alterations, but fleshly suggestions braided through innovative pedagogical practices of naturalsocial becoming-with that could help the symbiosis thrive through five human generations committed to healing damaged human and nonhuman lives and places. In its most reductive expression, the point was to give the butterflies and their people—to give the Migrations—a chance to have a future in a time of mass extinctions. By five years of age, Camille ’s skin was brilliantly banded and colored in yellow and black like a late-stage monarch caterpillar, increasing in intensity until age ten. But by initiation into adult responsibilities at age fifteen, Camille ’s skin had the muted tones and patterns of the monarch chrysalis. As an adult, Camille gradually acquired the pattern and coloration of a vibrant orange and black adult butterfly. Camille ’s adult body was more androgynous in appearance than that of sexually dimorphic monarch adults. All of the symbiont children developed both visible traits and subtle sensory similarities to their animal partners in early childhood. Although they should not have been surprised, the consequences of this developmental fact blindsided the adult compostists, as the first serious conflicts in New Gauley erupted in the learning groups of the young. Five youngsters who were bonded to animal symbionts, two children born to dissenting parents, and so not bonded with such symbionts, and five in-migrant children without symbionts made up the first cohort of little ones. The symbiotic young were struggling to integrate mindful bodies unimaginable to their parents. In addition, each symbiosis was the only one of its kind in these early generations. Camille formed fierce friendships, especially with Kess, the youngster bonded with the American kestrels; but each symbiotic child was acutely aware of their irreducible difference. Kess and Camille gravitated to each other partly because they knew kestrels ate butterflies, and both of their threatened animal symbionts flourished best in fields, meadows, roadsides, pastures, and mixed woodlands full of a myriad of flowering plants. From the beginning, the symbiont children developed a complex subjectivity composed of loneliness, intense sociality, intimacy with nonhuman others, specialness, lack of choice, fullness of meaning, and sureness of future purpose. This landscape of converging and diverging feelings tended to grade into arrogance and exceptionalism toward the nonsymbiotic children, and even toward their parents and other nonsymbiotic adults of New Gauley. Because symbionts were still rare in the overall population of an area in the initial generations after the first Communities of Compost were established, in vulnerable moments nonsymbiotic children and adults could and did feel the symbionts were freaks, both more-thanand other-than-human, and seriously threatening. Remembering that humanity meant humus, and not Anthropos or Homo, did not come easily in the webs of Western cultures that predominated in New Gauley. Determined to help youngsters through the mazes of self-preoccupation, social enthusiasm, playfulness, pride in each other, fear, competition, and bullying that they had known in school, the New Gauley adults and their young were faced with quite another challenge in the emerging community of both symbiotic and nonsymbiotic children. New Gauley compostists soon found that storytelling was the most powerful practice for comforting, inspiring, remembering, warning, nurturing compassion, mourning, and becoming-with each other in their differences, hopes, and terrors. Of course, the Communities of Compost emphasized a deep and wide range of approaches to educating both young and old, and the sciences and arts were especially elaborated and cherished. For youngsters and adults of most species in the communities, play was the most powerful and diverse activity for rearranging old things and proposing new things, new patterns of feeling and action, and for crafting safe enough ways to tangle with each other in conflict and collaboration. The practice of friendship and the practice of play, both ritualized and celebrated in small and large ways, were the core kin-forming apparatuses. Libraries in many formats and materialities abounded to evoke curiosities and sustain knowledge projects for learning to live and die well in the work of healing damaged places, selves, and other beings. Decolonial multispecies studies (including diverse and multimodal human and nonhuman languages) and an indefinitely expandable transknowledging approach called EcoEvoDevoHistoEthnoTechnoPsycho (Ecological Evolutionary Developmental Historical Ethnographic Technological Psychological studies) were essential layered and knotted inquiries for compostists. Compostists eagerly found out everything they could about experimental, intentional, utopian, dystopian, and revolutionary communities and movements across times and places. One of their great disappointments in these accounts was that so many started from the premises of starting over and beginning anew, instead of learning to inherit without denial and stay with the trouble of damaged worlds. Although hardly free of the sterilizing narrative of wiping the world clean by apocalypse or salvation, the richest humus for their inquiries turned out to be sf —science fiction and fantasy, speculative fabulation, speculative feminism, and string figures. Blocking the foreclosures of utopias, sf kept politics alive. So storytelling was the seed bag for flourishing for compostists, and Camille was fed on stories. Because the brave young princess loved the toxic forest beings, especially the despised and feared insects called the Ohmu, Camille’s favorite story was Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind. Like a turbo butterfly, Nausicaä could fly over the forest, fields, and towns on her agile personal jet-powered glider. The young Camille could never resist that vivid sensation. Hayao Miyazaki’s manga and anime story is set on a postapocalyptic earth menaced by the toxic forest’s critters, who were defending themselves and taking revenge for the natural world’s relentless destruction at the hands of militarized, power-mad, technological humans. Evil rulers continued to promise ultimate destruction in their drive to exterminate the toxic forest and extract the last drams of resources for the walled cities of privilege and exception. Through her study of the forest’s ecology, understanding of the physiology of the mushroomlike infected poisonous trees, and love for the dangerous mutant giant insects and their larvae, Nausicaä triumphed in her efforts to save both the people and the forest. She discovered that the trees purified the toxins and drop by drop were forming a vast underground aquifer of pure water that could regenerate the biodiverse earth. Attuned to the languages of the plants, fungi, and animals, Nausicaä could calm the incomprehension and fear of the people who were poisoned by the toxic emanations of the disturbed forest. She could propose peace between humans and other-than-humans because she befriended the toxic forest, a practice that reached deep into the young Camille ’s psyche. In the dramatic concluding scenes of the story, at great risk to herself, Nausicaä rescued a threatened larval Ohmu and so stopped the stampede of its giant adult conspecifics in their rage at the humans’ capturing and wounding of the youngster. Camille learned that there were many inspirations for Miyazaki’s story, including a Phaecian princess from Homer’s Odyssey named Nausicaä, who loved nature and music, cultivated a fervid imagination, and disdained possessions. Along with European medieval accounts of witches’ mastery of the winds, Master Windkey from Ursula Le Guin’s Earthsea also infused the Nausicaä tale. The adult Camille thought that the most generative inspiration, however, was a Japanese story from the Heian period, called “The Princess Who Loved Insects.” The princess did not beautify herself by blackening her teeth or plucking her eyebrows, and she scorned the idea of a husband. All her passions were for the caterpillars and creeping crawling critters disdained by others. Nausicaä had a companion animal, really a symbiont, a fierce and gentle little fox squirrel. In per’s memoir, the elder Camille described Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind as a fable of great danger and great companionship. Unlike conventional heroes, Nausicaä accompanied by animals, is a girl child and healer, whose courage matures in thick connection with many others and many kinds of others. Nausicaä cannot act alone, and also her personal response-ability and actions have great consequences for herself and for myriad human and nonhuman beings. Nausicaä’s connections and corridors are practical and material, as well as fabulous and enspirited in bumptious animist fashion. Hers are the arts of living on a damaged planet. This twentieth-century Japanese anime child sustained Camille in symbiosis with the monarchs for a lifetime. 
At initiation at age fifteen, as a coming-of-age gift the second Camille decided to ask for chin implants of butterfly antennae, a kind of tentacular beard, so that more vivid tasting of the flying insects’ worlds could become the heritage of the human partner too, helping in the work and adding to the corporeal pleasures of becoming-with. Proud of this vibrant sign of the lived symbiosis now in its second generation, once the procedures were complete the adolescent Camille undertook a trip to the overwintering habitat of the eastern migration to meet with indigenous people and campesinos who were rehabilitating damaged lands and waters along the transvolcanic belt between the states of México and Michoacán. Camille had been Camille ’s mentor, and over the first fifteen years of the new child’s life Camille tried to prepare the second-generation New Gauley human-butterfly symbiont for sustained visiting as the guest of the diverse communities of Michoacán. But Camille ’s lifework had been almost entirely along the corridors and in the towns, fields, mines, woods, coasts, mountains, deserts, and cities of the great eastern and western monarch migrations that are north of Mexico, into southern Canada on the east and into Washington and the Northern Rockies on the west. Camille worked, played, and struggled primarily with midwestern and southern farmers, agribusiness scientists, energy companies and their ruthless lawyers, mine workers, unemployed people, nature lovers, gardeners, corridor ecologists, insect specialists, and climate scientists, as well as artists performing with and for nonhuman critters. Although based in New Gauley and attuned especially to the ravaged landscapes and peoples of coal country there and across the continent, Camille also sojourned with the insects and their people in the winter homes of the western migration of the monarchs, especially along the Monterey Bay of Central California. So per understood the biological, cultural, historical worlds of these clusters of monarchs clinging to their local Monterey pines and crucial (if never really accepted by ecological nativists) Australian gum trees. Both sym and non-sym people across this vast expanse of land experienced the sympoieses of the Children of Compost primarily through their biological semiotic materialities. Of course, as an important component of per’s education and working alliances as both child and adult, Camille had studied with Native American, First Nation, and Métis teachers, who explained and performed diverse practices and knowledges for conjoined human and other-than-human becoming and exchange. But Camille had never deeply questioned the settler practices or categories of nature, culture, and biology that made per’s own transformative sympoiesis with monarchs comprehensible to perself. For practical and political, as well as ontological and epistemological, reasons, Camille recognized the urgent need both to deepen and to change the terms of the exchanges and collaborations with people, peoples, and otherthan-human critters in the southern migrations and residencies of the monarchs in Mexico. And so, although well read in decolonial and postcolonial literatures and engaged in lifelong correspondence with Mexican comrades, several of whom had personally made the journey to New Gauley and to California’s Santa Cruz to meet with the Communities of Compost there, Camille died before encountering monarch sympoiesis in material semiotic forms other than symbiogenesis. Then, on the first Día de los Muertos of per’s first sojourn in Mexico after coming of age, Camille was introduced to the Monarcas returning to their winter mountain home in November as the souls of the Mazahua dead. The Monarcas did not represent the souls of the dead; they were syms of the living butterflies and the human dead, in multinaturalist worldings that Camille had studied but could barely recognize and did not know how to greet. There were Communities of Compost in Michoacán and all over Mexico that had birthed symbiogenetic children for the work of rehabilitating ruined lands and waters through the coming generations. Mexicans were as much at home in the extended apparatuses of naturalcultural, biological knowledges and practices as their northern comrades. But none of the Mexican Communities of Compost, no matter their settler, mixed, or native heritages, had joined a human baby to migrating endangered critters that were themselves the visiting ancestors. The consequences of Camille ’s powerful introduction to the Monarca sympoiesis that joined the overwintering winged insects and the visiting ancestors reshaped the fabric of work for ecojustice that joined New Gauley and the communities of the transvolcanic belt for the coming three hundred years. Searching for a term they could share, Camille and per’s Mazahua hosts decided to name this kind of becoming-with “symanimagenesis.” The corridors, migrations, and contact zones of the monarchs collect up many ways of living and dying across the Americas! Thus the Mazahuas of central Mexico (México, Michoacán, and Queretaro) became vital to Camille’s story from the second generation on. Decolonial work on all sides of the border had to be intrinsic to every form of sympoiesis with the monarchs. Struggling with the consequences for the Communities of Compost of practices of conservation and restoration inherited from Anglo and Spanish settler colonialism and of both the Mexican and U.S. states’ ongoing suppression of and extraction from indigenous peoples, Camille no longer could not know about the Mazahuas’ land and water struggles, migrations to near and distant cities for ill-paid work, customary and illegal forest cutting, charcoal making, history of acting to preserve the trees and woodlands before the butterfly migration became an international issue, history also of old and new indigenous and outsider exploitation of the forest and the watershed, and resistance to U.S. and other foreign scientists and Mexican state regulations and bureaucrats that criminalize local subsistence practices in the butterfly preserve that became a World Heritage Site. In Camille ’s first weeks in Mazahua monarch country, the women of the communities in and around the butterfly reserve took per in hand. When the young sym arrived in autumn of , the radical Mazahua women were celebrating the ninety-sixth anniversary of the founding of their movement. In , “symbolically armed with farming tools and wooden rifles, they formed el Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua and pledged a strategy of non-violence.” The Zapatista movement had begun with a transformative armed uprising in Chiapas on January , , but the Zapatistas’ most important contribution to the ongoing strategies of the Mazahuan communities was their development of vigorous nonviolence in a broad, multigenerational opposition front. Communities of Compost all over the world studied Zapatistaheld municipalities called caracoles (snail shells). Initiating the visiting New Gauley sym into intense relationships with the living dead was the Mazahua women’s first priority. Politely resisting the temptation to thread their fingers continuously though the sensitive tentacular organs of their oddly bearded visitor, they were charmed by the butterfly antennae on Camille ’s chin and by per’s vividly colored adult skin patterns that had gradually replaced the dramatic caterpillar skin banding of the younger child. The Mazahuas were confident that these markings signified that the adolescent would become an apt student of their own human-butterfly worldings, and so a useful ally. To join in the work of human and other-than-human rehabilitation and multispecies environmental justice in indigenous territory, which had been dominated and drained for centuries by the state and other outside forces, Camille had to study the resurgence of peoples that ignited in the early years of the twenty-first century. On the night the monarchas returned in November , the women taught Camille a poem, “Soy Mazahua,” composed by Julio Garduño Cervantes, which remained vital to their work for the dead and the living. The beautifully dressed people at the fiesta were singing the poem in the midst of extravagant fireworks, feasting, and greeting returning kin. The poem commemorated a Mazahua leader who had been murdered in on the way home from a cemetery on el Día de los Muertos. All over Mexico, this killing outraged indigenous pueblos and ignited a movement that was stronger than ever by the time Camille visited. The women of El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua taught that butterflies drank the tears of those who mourned the murdered, raped, and disappeared ones of every land. I AM MAZAHUA You have wanted to deny my existence But I do not deny yours. But I exist. I am Mazahua. ... I am made of this land, the air, water and sun. And together we repeat, We are Mazahuas ... You have enslaved my ancestors and stolen their lands. You have murdered them. ... I build the house but you live in it. You are the criminal but I am in prison. We made the revolution but you took advantage of it. My voice rises and joins with a thousand others. And together we repeat, We are Mazahuas Our hands sowed for everyone. Our hands will struggle for everyone. I am Mazahua. —Julio Garduño Cervantes Camille found it difficult at first to grasp how active the dead were across this region and how critical to the work of compostists to restore damaged land and its human and nonhuman beings. Camille had to learn to let go of colonialist notions of religion and secularism to begin to appreciate the sheer semiotic materiality of those who came before. Until sympoiesis with the dead could be acknowledged, sympoiesis with the living was radically incomplete. Visiting urbanites from Mexico City were no better at seriously engaging the epistemological, ontological, and practical demands of this aspect of indigenous cosmopolitics than Camille was. Modernity and its category work proved terribly durable for hundreds of years after the withering critique conducted in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries had made explicit adherence to the tenets of philosophical and political modernity unthinkable for serious people, including scientists and artists. Modernity was driven underground, but remained undead. Making peace with this vampire ancestor was an urgent task for the Communities of Compost. In the early weeks of Camille’s sojourn, the teenage Mazahua women of El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua undertook the task of teaching the sym about the struggle for water and forest ecojustice in the region. Throughout the late twentieth and twenty-first centuries, in immense water transfer projects, Mexico City drew this precious fluid from the lakes, rivers, and aquifers that reached across the mountains and into the basins occupied by indigenous peoples and other critters to the north and west. This practice was immensely destructive, a fact highlighted in a report of the Union of Scientists Committed to Society, which argued, “Transferring water, moving large volumes from one basin to another, is not only unsustainable and affects the environment in the medium and long term, but also causes forced displacements that destroy towns and communities and marginalize people, who are obliged to move to the poverty belts of the large cities.” By the time of the birth of Camille , the Cutzamala System already pumped billion gallons per year to Mexico City and its twenty-seven municipalities, while the Mazahua communities did not have potable water. El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua carried out relentless demonstrations and actions in Mexico City and elsewhere and won many partial victories. The struggle continued throughout Camille ’s lifetime and after. In sympoiesis, the monarch critters, human and other-than-human, drank from the healing tears of the living and the dead. By this generation, two-thirds of the residents of the Communities of Compost around the world were symbionts engaged in intense work and play for sustaining vulnerable beings across the hardest centuries of planetary crisis and widespread human and other-than-human suffering. A significant number of syms had decided to leave their compostist communities, surrendering residency rights for citizenship in other political formations. Some humans, both in-migrants and nonsym offspring born in the new towns, became solid compostists without ever wanting to engage personally in symbiogenetic kin making. Allied with diverse non-sym peoples, compostist practices of living and dying flourished everywhere, and the people in the emerging epoch of partial healing felt deeply entangled with the ongoing tentacular Chthulucene. There had been great losses of kinds of living beings, as rapid climate change and interlocked ecosystem collapses swept the earth; and the mass extinction event of the Capitalocene and Anthropocene was not over. Still, by the time Camille was fifty years old, it was clear that human numbers, while still too heavy in most places for the damaged natural, social, and technical systems of earth to sustain, were declining within a deliberate pattern of heightened environmental justice. That pattern emphasized a preference for the poor among humans, a preference for biodiverse naturalsocial ecosystems, and a preference for the most vulnerable among other critters and their habitats. Much of the most inventive work over the years since the first compostist communities appeared was developing the linkages of this pattern. That work required both powerful recognition and strengthening of inherited Chthulucene practices that had not been fully obliterated in the Capitalocene and Anthropocene, and also newly invented ways of linking the three critical preferences to each other. The wealthiest and highest-consuming human populations reduced new births the most, with the support of the Communities of Compost; but human births everywhere were deliberately below replacement rates, so as to slowly and effectively reach levels that made sense for distributed and diverse humanity as humus, rather than as end points of nature and culture. Practices of making kin, not babies, had taken hold inside and outside the Communities of Compost. Against all expectations in the early twenty-first century, after only years sympoieses, both symbiogenetic and symanimagenic, seemed to be making a difference in holding open time and space for many of earth’s most vulnerable, including the monarch migrations and their diverse human people and peoples. Forests in the transvolcanic belt of Mexico were resurgent, and water had been restored to the pillaged aquifers. People had worked out robust peace with the critters and scientists of the Biosphere Reserve, as greater control was relocated to campesino and indigenous organizations for environmental justice. Migrations north of Mexico now could count on larval and adult food as nonmonocropping organic agriculture, ubiquitous gardens, and species-rich roadside verges filled the landscape. Devastation of habitats for people and other critters caused by Big Energy and Big Capital was not finished, but the tide had definitively turned. Humus-friendly technological innovation, creative rituals and celebrations, profound economic restructuring, reconfiguration of political control, demilitarization, and sustained work for connecting corridors and for ecological, cultural, and political restoration had all made an impact and were growing in force. While Camille could not forget the monarchs, per’s attention was turned to the fact that syms needed to take stock of themselves collectively in unprecedented ways. The major events of Camille ’s life were travels to gatherings around the world of sym and non-sym humans in the face of general recognition that both humanity and animality had been fundamentally transformed by compostist practices. Of course, many peoples of earth had never divided living beings into human and animal; nonetheless, they had all ordered things differently from what was plainly happening everywhere by . It was also inescapably clear by that the changes were not the same everywhere. Sym worlding was not one thing, and it was diverging and adapting exuberantly in EcoEvoDevoHistoTechnoEthnoPsycho fashion. The recognition was turbulent, exhilarating, and dangerous. The crises of bullying among the children in Camille ’s generation were nothing to the terrors of transition in the third generation of the Communities of Compost, who would in a few more generations become the majority of people on earth. Inventing earthwide cosmopolitics between and among syms and non-syms was the daunting task of Camille ’s generation. Peoples from every fold of earth had long been both generated and nourished by stories, myths, performances, powers, and embodiments of entities not divided into categories recognizable to most conventional Western philosophy and politics. Such stories and embodiments were also deeply embedded in the practices and accounts of both recent and long-established peoples living throughout what was once called the West. Camille ’s generation found biologies and storytelling to be the richest veins for weaving the needed fabrics to bind syms and non-syms together. Coming-of-age stories in sf, from Joanna Russ’s Alyx in The Adventures of Alyx to Julie Czerneda’s decidedly nonhumanoid young female entity Esen-alit-Quar in her Web Shifters series, entranced many in Camille ’s generation, and these tales had been carefully maintained in the compostist archives. Camille was especially drawn to Philip Pullman’s twentieth-century stories about the young girl Lyra Belacqua and her daemon, Pantalaimon. The animal daemons of human beings were capable of multiple transformations until the time of human adolescence, when the animal stabilized into a single morph. Pullman imagined the daemons as expressions of a tripartite human person, rather than as a distinct beings; but compostist syms had other and better resources for understanding the join, which did not rely on the trinary soul/body/ mind heritage that Pullman used in his war against both monotheism and the Authority. Compostists understood the daemons in less ontologically purified ways, more entangled with situated animisms in diverse modern and traditional, past and present worlds. The bonds between human and daemon were very close to the symbiogenetic linkages forged for the young in compostist communities. Severing such bonds threatened persons at the deepest core of their being. Living-with was the only possible way to live-well. Heartened by these stories between and during endless meetings among quibbling and not infrequently fearful syms and non-syms, the critters of earth were forging planetwide ontological revolutions for making kin. After decades of heartening progress, new viral diseases afflicting soilbased fungal symbionts of food plants needed by many species in the subfamily Danainae to fight off their own protozoan parasites emerged earthwide too quickly for response. The monarchs joined the myriad kinds of beings that disappeared in the ongoing great extinctions that had been unloosed by the Plantationocene, Anthropocene and Capitalocene. Near the end of life, witnessing the loss of the great monarch migrations across the Americas, and with them the loss of the patterns of living and dying they sustained, Camille knew that mentoring Camille would take other paths than those that had guided Camille ’s teaching of Camille . In a diary archived by the compostists, Camille wrote about per’s wrenching feelings in at the age of eighty-five, while watching the celebrations for fifteen-year-old Camille ’s initiation into full sym responsibilities. Involved for decades in research on the ecologies of the insects in their human and nonhuman holobiomes, Camille had been studying the reports from all over the earth about the rapid population crashes of moths and butterflies, especially among the Danainae. Although widespread and diverse, monarchs would be among the first to disappear; and no one yet knew why. It was not clear that total extinction would result, but it was clear the migrations were doomed. Holding open space would involve much different work for Camille than for the previous generations, and it was Camille ’s hard task to take the young sym through another sort of initiation before dying in . Of course, Camille had a great deal of experience to draw from with other syms who had lost their critters. There were thousands of Speakers for the Dead around the earth by , each tasked with bringing critters who had been irretrievably lost into potent presence for giving knowledge and heart to all of those continuing to work for the still diverse earth’s robust and partial recuperation. Over three hundred years, the Communities of Compost had built a potent earthwide network of refugia and foci of resurgent naturalcultural diversity. The Speakers for the Dead teach practices of remembering and mourning that enlist extinct human and nonhuman critters in the ongoing work of cutting the shackles of Double Death, which strangled a vast proportion of ways of living and dying in the Plantationocene, Anthropocene and Capitalocene. For help in preparing Camille to take up the tasks of a Speaker for the Dead, Camille turned to the Canadian-Nunavut, nontraditional, young Inuk woman throat singer Tanya Tagaq and her album Animism, which had been so powerful in strengthening Inuit and also other situated resurgence in the twenty-first century. Tagaq practiced what a twenty-first-century anthropologist, Susan Harding, tentatively called “experimental animism.” In Animism, Tagaq and her partners, violinist Jesse Zubot and drummers Jean Martin and DZ Michael Red, performed a musical argument for and about continuities, transformations, contradictions, and sf visual and acoustic kinetic interconversions of human and animal beings in situated worlds. Hunting, eating, living-with, dying-with, and moving-with in the turbulent folds and eddies of a situated earth: these were the affirmations and controversies of Tagaq’s singing and website texts and interviews. Tagaq embraced oppositions and conflicts, not to purify them, but to live inside complexities of shared flesh, casting herself for some worlds and not others. At her Polaris Music Prize performance in September , the names of murdered and missing Aboriginal women scrolled behind Tagaq. The last track of Animism was titled “Fracking”; the first was “Caribou.” She wore seal fur cuffs during her Polaris performance; she affirmed the natural world and hunting by her people. Her risk-taking animism performed materialist worlds—gone, here, and to come. Proclaiming, “I want to live in worlds that are not supposed to be,” she affirmed that such worlds already are, have been, and will be. The music was utterly contemporary, and many mobile identities were in play and at risk. The work reached out to unexpected techniques and audiences; and it was unapologetically rooted in specific places, peoples, and critters. Tagaq’s practices of transforming sound, flesh, and kind were animist in old and new Inuit terms and in the related sense proposed by the anthropologist Eduardo Viveiros de Castro. Viveiros de Castro studied with Brazilian Amerindians, with whom he learned to theorize the radical conceptual realignment he called multinaturalism and perspectivism. “Animism is the only sensible version of materialism.” It matters which concepts conceptualize concepts. Materialist, experimental animism is not a New Age wish nor a neocolonial fantasy, but a powerful proposition for rethinking relationality, perspective, process, and reality without the dubious comforts of the oppositional categories of modern/ traditional or religious/secular. Human-animal knots do something different in this world. It matters which worlds world worlds. It matters who eats whom and how. It remains a material question for cosmopolitical critters in the Communities of Compost. For these reasons, Camille invoked Tanya Tagaq to share her power more than two hundred years after her death. CAMILLE Born . Human numbers are billion. Died in . Human numbers are billion. One billion human-critter symbionts inhabit the earth in . Two billion humans are not syms. Over percent of all critter species living in have vanished by . Millions of kinds of critters are syms with humans. The animal sym partners remain unaltered by human genes. The human syms take on ever more properties of their animal partners. Many humans are syms with extinct partners. STARHAWK’S SONG, TAUGHT BY THE SPEAKERS FOR THE DEAD Breathe deep. Feel the pain where it lives deep in us for we live, still, in the raw wounds and pain is salt in us, burning. Flush it out. Let the pain become a sound, a living river on the breath. Raise your voice. Cry out. Scream. Wail. Keen and mourn for the dismembering of the world. And so the fifth Camille inherited a powerful task from per’s mentor—to become a Speaker for the Dead, to bring into ongoing presence, through active memory, the lost lifeways, so that other symbiotic and sympoietic commitments would not lose heart. Crucial to the work was not to forget the stink in the air from the burning of the witches, not to forget the murders of human and nonhuman beings in the Great Catastrophes named the Plantationocene, Anthropocene, Capitalocene, to “keen and mourn for the dismembering of the world.” Moving through mourning to represencing, to the practice of vital memory, was the work of the Speakers for the Dead. Their task was to strengthen the healing that was gaining momentum across the earth. The fourth and fifth Camilles both traveled widely, drawing from their heritage of monarch symbioses, to teach and learn how to practice healing and ongoingness in the cyclones of continuing damage and partial resurgence. Before taking up the tasks of the Speaker for the Dead, remembering the bonds formed more than two hundred years earlier, Camille again sought help from the evolving, historically situated, symanimagenic kinmaking practices of twenty-fourth-century Mazahuas. Camille began per’s work with a year-long residence in Michoacán studying with the overlapping indigenous-scientific-activist communities that continued to heal damaged lives and lands there. The Mazahuas also mourned the loss of the living monarchs, and they were deeply worried how this extinction would reshape their own symanimagenic relations with their dead. By Camille ’s generation, there were millions of vanished species, vanished kinds of critters both human and other-than-human, and so much for the Speakers for the Dead to do to replenish heart and mind for and with those who continue to stay with the trouble. And to stay with the ragged joy of ordinary living and dying, up to and beyond the year . The monarchs’ people decided that this Speaker for the Dead should itself be a new kind of sym, joining the symbiogenetic Camille with symanimagenic persons from the transvolcanic belt. Such persons had been friends and coworkers before; now they were to undertake another experimental and risky sympoiesis for unfurling times. The Speakers for the Dead are also tasked with bringing into mind and heart the new things of earth, not only the symbionts and symanimants and their communities and corridors, but also the emerging kinds of beings and ways of life of an always evolving home world. The Speakers for the Dead seek and release the energies of the past, present, and future Chthulucene, with its myriad tentacles of opportunistic, dangerous, and generative sympoiesis. The Children of Compost would not cease the layered, curious practice of becoming-with others for a habitable, flourishing world. Notes Introduction Critters is an American everyday idiom for varmints of all sorts. Scientists talk of their “critters” all the time; and so do ordinary people all over the U.S., but perhaps especially in the South. The taint of “creatures” and “creation” does not stick to “critters”; if you see such a semiotic barnacle, scrape it off. In this book, “critters” refers promiscuously to microbes, plants, animals, humans and nonhumans, and sometimes even to machines. Less simple was deciding how to spell Chthulucene so that it led to diverse and bumptious chthonic dividuals and powers and not to Chthulhu, Cthulhu, or any other singleton monster or deity. A fastidious Greek speller might insist on the “h” between the last “l” and “u”; but both for English pronunciation and for avoiding the grasp of Lovecraft’s Cthulhu, I dropped that “h.” This is a metaplasm. Chapter : Playing String Figures with Companion Species In languages attuned to partial translation, in U.S. English string figures are called cat’s cradle; in French, jeux de ficelle; in Navajo, na’atl’o’. See Haraway, “sf: Science Fiction, Speculative Fabulation, String Figures, So Far.” For a mathematical joke-exposition of Terrapolis, see Haraway, sf: Speculative Fabulation and String Figures. From Proto-Germanic and Old English, guman later became human, but both come soiled with the earth and its critters, rich in humus, humaine, earthly beings as opposed to the gods. In Hebrew, Adam is from adamah or “ground.” The historical linguistic gender tone of guman, like human and man, is masculine/universal; but in sf worlding adam, guman, adamah become more a microbiome of fermenting critters of many genders and kinds, i.e., companion species, at table together, eating and being eaten, messmates, compost. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Ethical Doings in Naturecultures,” discusses a transformational biopolitics, care of the earth and its many species, including people, through care of the soil in the permaculture movement. Strathern, Reproducing the Future, ; Strathern, The Gender of the Gift. Whitehead, Adventures. Stengers, Cosmopolitics I and II. Despret, “The Body We Care For”; Despret, “The Becoming of Subjectivity in Animal Worlds.” Despret gave me “rendering capable” and much more. “Becomingwith” is developed in Haraway, When Species Meet, –, . On agential realism and intra-action, see Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway. For the old-style ethnology, see Jayne, String Figures. Hogness, “California Bird Talk.” Naabeehó Bináhásdzo (the Navajo Nation, the legal geographically defined territory for the semi-autonomous nation), or Diné Bikéyah (the People’s name for Navajoland), is located in the Four Corners area of the southwestern United States, surrounded by Colorado, Arizona, Utah, and New Mexico. For Navajo scholarship on their history, written in the web of Diné creation stories and the discipline of academic history, see Denetdale, Reclaiming Diné History. There are several Internet sources for Navajo string games and string figures, with varied stories and names, e.g., “Diné String Games” and the large “Library of Navajo String Games.” For an extraordinary video of an elder Navajo woman, Margaret Ray Bochinclonny, playing string games, see “Navajo String Games by Grandma Margaret.” Margaret Ray’s grandson, Terry Teller, explains Navajo string figure star constellations at “So Naal Kaah, Navajo Astronomy.” Navajo string games are played mainly in winter, Spider Woman’s storytelling season. Anderson, Creatures of Empire. Rock doves have probably been in relations of codomestication with people for about ten thousand years, and they are recorded five thousand years ago in Mesopotamia on cuneiform tablets. Throughout this chapter, I will use the common term pigeons and rock doves interchangeably unless otherwise noted. There are several dozens of living and fossil species in the Columbidae family that includes C. livia domestica, including over thirty living Old World pigeon or dove species. Some Columbidae species have expansive natural ranges, and others have specialized needs met only in small ranges. The greatest variety of the family is in the Indomalaya and Australasian ecozones. Domestic pigeons have diversified into many dozens of formal and informal kinds and breeds, as well as the ubiquitous feral pigeons making a living from Istanbul to Tokyo to London to Los Angeles to Berlin to Cairo to Cape Town to Buenos Aires. For an updated “List of Pigeon Breeds,” see the Wikipedia entry in the bibliography. A Google images search for N o t e s t o C h a p t e r pigeon breeds yields a visual feast. Domestic breeds are thought to have originated in the Middle East and Central Asia. For some of the breeds from this region, including tumblers, spinners, and rollers, see “Turkish Tumblers.com.” The bbc did a show about how the pigeon fanciers of Baghdad kept their birds and their sport alive after during the Iraq war; the detailed corporeal practices of love and care of the men for their pigeons are palpable. See Muir, “The Pigeon Fanciers of Baghdad.” For sociological ethnography of racing-pigeon worlds, see Jerolmack, “Primary Groups and Cosmopolitan Ties”; Jerolmack, “Animal Practices, Ethnicity and Community”; Jerolmack, The Global Pigeon. For centuries Iran has been a passionate center of pigeon racing, a practice that continues today despite being illegal (but tolerated) under the current regime because racing events are occasions for gambling. For the Persian/French bilingual ethnographic treatment of this fascinating story, see Goushegir, Le combat du colombophile. See also “World Market in Pigeons.” For an extraordinary index to articles and other information relating to racing pigeons written mainly by fanciers, see “Racing Pigeon-Post.” For research on how pigeons do these things, see Walcott, “Pigeon Homing.” For a crime thriller set in the racing-pigeon world, check out Scottoline, The Vendetta Defense. Working-class New York dockworkers, who are racing-pigeon men, feature prominently in the famous film starring Marlon Brando, On the Waterfront. See Elizabeth Jones, Night Flyers, for a moving historical mystery thriller for girls that tells the story of a twelve-year-old farm girl in North Carolina in World War I who loves, protects, and raises homing pigeons. She agrees to train night flyers for the U.S. Army message service. The birds themselves are vivid, fully fleshed out, relational players in the narrative. U.S. Coast Guard, “Pigeon Search and Rescue Project.” For example, see Prior, Schwarz, and Güntürkün, “Mirror-Induced Behavior in the Magpie.” The mirror test was developed in by Gordon Gallop Jr. Epstein, Lanza, and Skinner, “‘Self-awareness’ in the Pigeon”; Allen, DeLabar, and Drossel, “Mirror Use in Pigeons.” See Keio University, “Pigeons Show Superior Self-recognition Abilities”; Toda and Watanabe, “Discrimination of Moving Video Images of Self by Pigeons.” Watanabe, Sakamoto, and Wakita, “Pigeons’ Discrimination of Paintings by Monet and Picasso.” Berokoff, “Attachment” and “Love.” In a post called “Let’s Hear,” providing a fascinating window into structures of gender in marriage in these worlds, Berokoff surveyed other wives of pigeon racers from several continents about how they felt about the sport, the pigeons, their husbands, time, and the labor and pleasure of care for the birds. Berokoff, “Love.” Beatriz da Costa died on December , . For access to her work, including PigeonBlog, see “Beatriz da Costa’s Blog and Project Hub.” See also da Costa, “Interspecies Coproduction.” For a discussion of da Costa’s work, especially her last project, Dying for the Other, see Haraway, Lord, and Juhasz, “Feminism, Technology, Transformation.” See da Costa, Dying for the Other. Notes to Chapter Da Costa, “PigeonBlog,” . All quotes are from this essay. Giving a sense of the skills needed for this collective project, human team members included: Beatriz da Costa (artist, researcher), Richard Desroisiers (pigeon owner), Rufus Edwards (scientific consultant), Cina Hazegh (artist, researcher), Kevin Ponto (artist, researcher), Bob Matsuyama (pigeon owner), Robert Nideffer (copyeditor), Peter Osterholm (pigeon owner), Jamie Schulte (electronics consultant and dear friend), Ward Smith (videographer). See also da Costa and Philips, Tactical Biopolitics. The wonderful sf writer Gwyneth Jones also has an essay in this book that inspires my own storytelling, “True Life Science Fiction.” Da Costa, “PigeonBlog,” . Da Costa, “PigeonBlog,” . I am so greedy for stories of critters and their people collaborating in work and play that I do not always see the rough edges and ongoing troubles. One PigeonBlog team member informally told me that he sometimes found it hard to watch the pigeons learning to fly with the packs and ruffling their feathers in annoyance while they were fitted. He hoped they took pride in their part; but he reminded me that work and play, whether for art, science, or politics—or for all three—are not innocent activities and the burdens rarely fall symmetrically. For a recent pigeon spy report from Iran, see Hambling, “Spy Pigeons Circle the World.” Hambling’s speculation about ties of Beatriz da Costa’s PigeonBlog project to avian spies at Iran’s nuclear facilities is ironic, to say the least. But it does seem that the United States might be losing both high-tech robotic remote-controlled spy drones and well-equipped spy pigeons over Iran. It’s enough to make the mullahs suspicious. Me too. See also Denega, The Cold War Pigeon Patrols. Da Costa, “PigeonBlog,” . It is too easy to write as if struggles and positions separating animal rights people from other advocates for animals and animal-human worlding were straightforward and closed; they are not. For one discussion of this issue between differing animal-loving feminists, see Potts and Haraway, “Kiwi Chicken Advocate Talks with Californian Dog Companion.” Cornell’s Margaret Barker, who ran workshops for Washington, DC, school groups in the late s, provided these optimistic reports. See Youth, “Pigeons.” “Mais sans colombophile, sans savoir et savoir-faire des hommes et des oiseaux, sans sélection, sans apprentissage, sans transmission des usages, quand bien même resterait-il des pigeons, plus aucun ne sera voyageur. Ce qu’il s’agit de commémorer n’est donc pas un animal seul, ni une pratique seule, mais bien un agencement de deux ‘devenirs avec’ qui s’inscrit, explicitement, à l’origine du projet. Autant dire, ce qu’il s’agit de faire exister, ce sont des relations par lesquelles des pigeons transforment des hommes en colombophiles talentueux et par lesquelles ces derniers transforment des pigeons en voyageurs fiables. C’est cela que l’oeuvre commémore. Elle se charge de faire mémoire au sens de prolonger activement. Il y a ‘reprise.’” Despret, “Ceux qui insistent.” Translation by Donna Haraway. See Crasset, “Capsule,” for the story and a picture of the pigeon loft that Matali Crasset designed. Australia was the first continent where Europeans recorded string figures. There N o t e s t o C h a p t e r are many names in many Aboriginal languages, for example, matjka-wuma in Yirrkala. See Davidson, “Aboriginal Australian String Figures.” See also “Survival and Revival of the String Figures of Yirrkala.” “Batman’s Treaty,” “Batman Park,” and “Wurundjeri,” Wikipedia. I leave the Wikipedia references unadorned partly to mark my own ignorance, partly in appreciation of a flawed but remarkable tool. Downing, “Wild Harvest—Bird Poo.” Chapter : Tentacular Thinking Epigraph : Scott Gilbert, “We Are All Lichens Now.” See Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber, “A Symbiotic View of Life.” Gilbert has erased the “now” from his rallying cry; we have always been symbionts—genetically, developmentally, anatomically, physiologically, neurologically, ecologically. Epigraph : These sentences are on the rear cover of Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss. From Virginia Woolf’s Three Guineas, “think we must” is the urgency relayed to feminist collective thinking-with in Women Who Make a Fuss through Puig de la Bellacasa, Penser nous devons. Hormiga, “A Revision and Cladistic Analysis of the Spider Family Pimoidae.” See “Pimoa cthulhu,” Wikipedia; “Hormiga Laboratory.” “The brand of holist ecological philosophy that emphasizes that ‘everything is connected to everything,’ will not help us here. Rather, everything is connected to something, which is connected to something else. While we may all ultimately be connected to one another, the specificity and proximity of connections matters— who we are bound up with and in what ways. Life and death happen inside these relationships. And so, we need to understand how particular human communities, as well as those of other living beings, are entangled, and how these entanglements are implicated in the production of both extinctions and their accompanying patterns of amplified death” (Van Dooren, Flight Ways, ). Two indispensable books by my colleague-sibling from thirty-plus years in the History of Consciousness Department at the University of California, Santa Cruz, guide my writing. Clifford, Routes and Returns. Chthonic derives from ancient Greek khthonios, of the earth, and from khthōn, earth. Greek mythology depicts the chthonic as the underworld, beneath the earth; but the chthonic ones are much older (and younger) than those Greeks. Sumeria is a riverine civilizational scene of emergence of great chthonic tales, including possibly the great circular snake eating its own tail, the polysemous Ouroboros (figure of the continuity of life, an Egyptian figure as early as bce; Sumerian sf worlding dates to bce or before). The chthonic will accrue many resonances throughout my chapter. See Jacobsen, The Treasures of Darkness. In lectures, conversations, and e-mails, the scholar of ancient Middle Eastern worlds at uc Santa Cruz, Gildas Hamel, gave me “the abyssal and elemental forces before they were astralized by chief gods and their tame committees” (personal communication, Notes to Chapter June , ). Cthulhu (note spelling), luxuriating in the science fiction of H. P. Lovecraft, plays no role for me, although it/he did play a role for Gustavo Hormiga, the scientist who named my spider demon familiar. For the monstrous male elder god (Cthulhu), see Lovecraft, The Call of Cthulhu. I take the liberty of rescuing my spider from Lovecraft for other stories, and mark the liberation with the more common spelling of chthonic ones. Lovecraft’s dreadful underworld chthonic serpents were terrible only in the patriarchal mode. The Chthulucene has other terrors—more dangerous and generative in worlds where such gender does not reign. Undulating with slippery eros and gravid chaos, tangled snakes and ongoing tentacular forces coil through the twenty-first century ce. Consider: Old English oearth, German Erde, Greek Gaïa, Roman terra, Dutch aarde; Old English w(e)oruld (“affairs of life,” “a long period of time,” “the known life,” or “life on earth” as opposed to the “afterlife”), from a Germanic compound meaning “age of the human race” (wer); Old Norse heimr, literally “abode.” Then consider Turkish dünya and go to dunyā (the temporal world), an Arabic word that was passed to many other languages, such as Persian, Dari, Pashto, Bengali, Punjabi, Urdu, Hindi, Kurdish, Nepali, Turkish, Arumanian, and North Caucasian languages. Dunyā is also a loanword in Malay and Indonesian, as well as in Greek δουνιας—so many words, so many roots, so many pathways, so many mycorrhizal symbioses, even if we restrict ourselves only to Indo-European tangles. There are so many kin who might better have named this time of the Anthropocene that is at stake now. The anthropos is too much of a parochial fellow; he is both too big and too small for most of the needed stories. Eva Hayward proposes the term tentacularity; her trans-thinking and -doing in spidery and coralline worlds entwine with my writing in sf patterns. See Hayward, “FingeryEyes”; “SpiderCitySex”; and “Sensational Jellyfish.” See Morgan, “Sticky Tales.” UK experimental artist Eleanor Morgan’s spider silk art spins many threads resonating with this chapter, tuned to the interactions of animals (especially arachnids and sponges) and humans. Morgan, “Website.” Katie King aligns Hayward’s “fingery eyes” and “tentacularity” with “networked reenactments” or “transknowledges.” “Working out in a multiverse of articulating disciplines, interdisciplines, and multidisciplinarities, such transdisciplinary inspection actually enjoys the many flavors of details, offerings, passions, languages, things . . . One index for the evaluation of transdisciplinary work is how well it learns and models how to be affected or moved, how well it opens up unexpected elements of one’s own embodiments in lively and re-sensitizing worlds.” King, Networked Reenactments, . See also King, “A Naturalcultural Collection of Affections.” Think we must. Muddle, Old Dutch for muddying the waters. I use muddle as a theoretical trope and soothing wallow to trouble the trope of visual clarity as the only sense and affect for mortal thinking. Muddles team with company. Empty spaces and clear vision are bad fictions for thinking, not worthy of sf or of contemporary biology. My speculative feminist courage has been fed by Puig de la Bellacasa, “Touching Technologies, Touching Visions.” N o t e s t o C h a p t e r For a gorgeous animated model of a densely packed living neuron, where proteins muddle on their herky-jerky way to making cells work, see “Protein Packing: Inner Life of a Cell” and Zimmer, “Watch Proteins Do the Jitterbug.” Ingold, Lines, –. The pile was made irresistible by Puig de la Bellacasa, “Encountering Bioinfrastructure.” Art science activism infuses this book. In the struggle for multispecies environmental justice in the face of coal company mountaintop removal in her homeworld in West Virginia, with her wife Annie Sprinkle (environmental activist, radical adult film director and performer, former sex worker), uc Santa Cruz artist Beth Stephens made the “sexiest nature documentary ever,” Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story. The quote is from a review by Russ McSpadden, “Ecosexuals of the World Unite!” In love and rage (Emma Goldman), think we must (Virginia Woolf) for a habitable planet. Throughout this essay I use the Latinate words terran and terra, even while I swim in Greek names and stories, including the material-semiotic story of Gaia and Bruno Latour’s “Gaia stories/geostories.” Terra is especially legible in sf, but Gaia is important in sf too. My favorite is John Varley’s Gaea Trilogy, Titan (), Wizard (), and Demon (). Varley’s Gaea is an old woman, who/which is a living being in the shape of a ,-kilometer-diameter Stanford torus, inhabited by many different species, in orbit around the planet Saturn. For a fan site, see “Gaea, the Mad Titan.” Latour’s Earthbound (“Terriens” in his French) and Stengers’s intrusive Gaia would recognize Varley’s irascible, unpredictable Gaea. Gaia is more legible in systems theories than Terra, as well as in “New Age” cultures. Gaia comes into her/its own in the Anthropocene, but Terra sounds a more earthy tone for me. However, Terra and Gaia are not in opposition, nor are the Earthbound, who are given to us in loving, risk-taking, powerful writing by Bruno Latour, in opposition to Terrans. Rather, Gaians and Terrans are in a queer planetwide litter of chthonic ones who must be re-membered urgently. It is in that sense that I hear together Isabelle Stengers’s “cosmopolitics” and my verbally miscegenated “Terrapolis.” We are making string figures together. Allied to this kind of argument is Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway. Outside (and inside) the odd thing named the West, there are myriad histories, philosophies, and practices—some civilizational, some urban, some neither—that propose living and dying in other knots and patterns that do not presume isolated, much less binary, unities and polarities that then need to be brought into connection. Variously and dangerously configured relationality is just what is. Flawed but powerful systems theories are the best technoscientific models we have so far for many Gaian relationalities. An American evolutionary biologist, David Barash, writes compellingly about convergences (not identities and not resources that can be hijacked to cure Western ills) between ecological sciences and various Buddhist streams, schools, and traditions that emphasize connectedness. Barash emphasizes that ways of living, dying, acting, and nurturing response-ability are embedded in these matters (BudNotes to Chapter dhist Biology). What if Western evolutionary and ecological sciences had been developed from the start within Buddhist instead of Protestant ways of worlding? Why do I find it so jarring that David Barash is a committed neo-Darwinian in evolutionary theory? See Barash, Natural Selections. The need for complexity theories tuned to paradox is obvious! Based on his extensive study of Chinese knowledges and sciences, Joseph Needham asked a similar question to Barash’s many years ago about embryology and biochemistry in The Grand Titration: Science and Society in East and West. Needham’s organicism and Marxism are both crucial for this story, something to remember in thinking about how to configure what I will explore in this chapter under the sign Capitalocene. On Needham, see Haraway, Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields. What happens if we cultivate response-ability for the Capitalocene inside the netbags of sympoiesis, Buddhism, ecological evolutionary developmental biology (EcoEvoDevo), Marxism, Stengersian cosmopolitics, and other strong pulls against the modernizing foolishness of some analyses of capitalism? What happens if the relentless zero-sum games of neo-Darwinism give way to an extended evolutionary synthesis? Dempster, “A Self-Organizing Systems Perspective on Planning for Sustainability.” See – for a concise comparison of autopoietic and sympoietic systems. Table , p. , juxtaposes defining characteristics for autopoietic and sympoietic systems, such as: self-produced boundaries/lacking boundaries; organizationally closed/ organizationally ajar; external structural coupling/internal and external structural coupling; autonomous units/complex amorphous entities; central control/ distributed control; evolution between systems/evolution within systems; growth and development orientation/evolutionary orientation; steady state/potentially dramatic, surprising change; predictable/unpredictable. Katie King told me about the Dempster thesis as we tried to sort out our overlapping but not identical pleasures and resistances to autopoiesis and sympoiesis. See King, “Toward a Feminist Boundary Object-Oriented Ontology . . . or Should It Be a Boundary Object-Oriented Feminism?” Stengers, “Relaying a War Machine?,” . Strathern, The Relation; Partial Connections; and Kinship, Law and the Unexpected. Strathern, Reproducing the Future, . Baila Goldenthal (–) painted an extraordinary series of four Cat’s Cradletitled oil-on-wood panels in – and an oil-on-canvas in . For her and for me, cat’s cradle is an open-ended practice of continuous weaving (see her Weavers Series, –). “The techniques of under-painting and glazing invoke historical time; the enigma of the game itself reflects the complexity of human relationships.” Goldenthal, “Painting/Cats Cradle.” Goldenthal relates to cat’s cradle games as a metaphor for the game of life, and the intensely present, moving hands invite kinship with other tentacular beings. Her Cat’s Cradle/String Theory is the cover image for Nuclear Abolition Forum, no. (), an issue titled “Moving beyond Nuclear Deterrence to a Nuclear Weapons Free World.” Metamorphosis, fragility, temporality, disintegration, revelation—these are everywhere N o t e s t o C h a p t e r in her work. A student of the Kabbalah and of South Asian Indian culture and philosophy, Goldenthal worked in oils, bronze, leaded glass, paper, photography, printmaking, film, and ceramics. She accomplished powerful work in sculpture and in two-dimensional formats. Goldenthal, “Resumé.” Among my favorites is her Desert Walls of the mid-s, where she worked in photography and collage with tile, brick, straw, plaster, metal, and glass to evoke the visual enigmas of cliffs and rock walls of the U.S. desert Southwest. Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem; Hartouni, Visualizing Atrocity, especially chapter , “Thoughtlessness and Evil.” I set aside the strict humanism and the specific kind of thinking subject of Arendt’s project, as well as her insistence on the essential solitude of thinking. Thinking-with in the sf compost pile of this essay is not an enemy to the profound secular self-examination of Arendt’s historically situated human figure, but that is an argument for another day. Arendt characterized thinking as “training one’s mind to going visiting.” “This distancing of some things and bridging of others is part of the dialogue of understanding, for whose purposes direct experience establishes too close contact and mere knowledge erects artificial barriers.” Arendt, “Truth and Politics,” , quoted in Hartouni, Visualizing Atrocity, . Puig de la Bellacasa, “Matters of Care in Technoscience”; Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care. Title of a conference that Anna Tsing and coworkers organized at the University of California, Santa Cruz, May –, : “Anthropocene: Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet.” All quotations are from Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World, , , . Van Dooren, Flight Ways. Van Dooren’s colleague Deborah Bird Rose is everywhere in this thinking, especially in her treatment of the undoing of the tissues of ongoingness, the killing of generations, which she called “double death” in Reports from a Wild Country: Ethics for Decolonisation. See also van Dooren and Rose, “Unloved Others”; van Dooren and Rose, “Storied-Places in a Multispecies City.” The Extinction Studies Working Group, anchored in Australia, is a rich sympoietic gathering. See also Environmental Humanities South, anchored in Cape Town, South Africa. Van Dooren, “Keeping Faith with Death”; Flight Ways, chapter , “Mourning Crows: Grief in a Shared World.” This writing is in sf exchange with Vinciane Despret’s thinking about learning to be affected. See Despret, “The Body We Care For.” Van Dooren, Flight Ways, –. Also crucial to grasping thinking and semiotics outside the premises of modernist humanist doctrines, see Kohn, How Forests Think. Le Guin, “The Carrier Bag Theory,” . Le Guin’s essay () shaped my thinking about narrative in evolutionary theory and of the figure of woman the gatherer in Primate Visions. Le Guin learned about the Carrier Bag Theory of Evolution from Elizabeth Fisher, Women’s Creation, in that period of large, brave, speculative, worldly stories that burned in feminist theory in the s and s. Like speculative fabulation, speculative feminism was, and is, an sf practice. For a fuller Notes to Chapter sf game with both Le Guin and Octavia Butler, see chapter , “Sowing Worlds: A Seed Bag for Terraforming with Earth Others.” First published in Grebowicz and Merrick, Beyond the Cyborg. Le Guin, “The Carrier Bag Theory,” . For introduction and elucidation of the “god trick” in science and politics, see Haraway, “Situated Knowledges.” Latour, Gifford Lectures, Lecture , “The Puzzling Face of a Secular Gaïa.” Quotation from lecture manuscript. Latour, “War and Peace in an Age of Ecological Conflicts.” Quotation from lecture manuscript. Latour’s proportionality in this lecture is bracing: Humans : business as usual :: the Earthbound : total subversion. In “Feral Biologies,” Anna Tsing uses the word Holocene to mean something radically different from Latour; but their basic arguments rub against each other in often edgy agreement, generating some interesting friction. Tsing refers to the Holocene as the timeplaces of possible resurgence after disturbance; the Anthropocene is the timeplace of radical reduction, radical simplification, radical obliteration of the refugia of the Holocene, from which resurgence of species assemblages could occur. Latour’s and Tsing’s different uses of the same important words illustrate how polysemous possibilities lurk even in closely scrutinized linguistic precincts. Unnecessary oppositions can be easily spun from such different elaborations of words, and the expertise of geologists only adds to language’s generativity. I think some of Latour’s and Tsing’s hot friction comes from his reliance on Carl Schmitt and her love of Ursula K. Le Guin. Latour’s “Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern” is a major landmark in our collective understanding of the corrosive, self-certain, and self-contained traps of nothing-but-critique. Cultivating response-ability requires much more from us. It requires the risk of being for some worlds rather than others and helping to compose those worlds with others. In multistranded sf worlding, Maria Puig de la Bellacasa recomposts Latour’s “matters of concern” to ferment an even richer soil in her “Matters of Care in Technoscience.” Latour, “War and Peace in an Age of Ecological Conflicts,” lecture manuscript. To understand how the modernizing category of “belief” works in the United States in law, politics, and pedagogy, including religion and social science, see Harding, “Secular Trouble.” The figure of the never properly belonging, always leaving and returning “Prodigal Daughter” further unpacks the enabling and disabling operations of “belief” in deVries, “Prodigal Knowledge.” Tying knowledge practices to professions of belief in both religion and science is perhaps the single most difficult habit of thought to dislodge for Moderns, at least in the United States. Where belief is exacted, the Inquisition is never far behind. sf in the muddle of Terra/Gaia cannot exact belief, but can shape committed thinking companions. The figure for thinking-with in this ecology of practices is not so much “decision” as sympoietic “care” and “discernment.” The Prodigal Daughter remains N o t e s t o C h a p t e r a wayfarer, much more promising for pathways in troubled times than the paved road toward the feast prepared for the returning, forever-after obedient Prodigal Son and legitimate heir. Latour, “War and Peace in an Age of Ecological Conflicts,” lecture manuscript; Schmitt, The Nomos of the Earth. For a full exposition of his reliance on Schmitt’s hostis and political theology, see Latour, Gifford Lectures, Lecture , “War of Humans and Earthbound”: “If Humans are at war with It [Gaia], what about those whom I have proposed to call the Earthbound? Can they be ‘artisans of peace’?” (unpublished lecture manuscript). Such artisans are what Latour works to nourish here and elsewhere. His question deserves more space, but a few words about hostis are necessary. Latour and I both ate the “host” in the sacrificial Eucharistic feast, and so we know what it means to be in the material-semiotic world where sign and signifier have imploded in meaningful flesh. Neither of us fits very well in secular Protestant semiotics, dominant in the university and in science, and that shapes our approaches to science studies and much else. But note that the “host” that we ate—our communion—is firmly ensconced in the story of the acceptable sacrifice to the Father. Latour and I ate too much and too little when we consumed this host and refused (and still refuse) to disavow it. I have a case of permanent raging indigestion, even as I hold fast to the joy and the implosion of metaphor and world. I need to know more about Latour’s digestive comforts and discomforts because I suspect they are at the root of our different lures for changing the story for the Earthbound. In the sacrificial Eucharistic worlding, there are strong kin ties, etymologically and historically, to the host of Schmitt, where we find the guest, hostage, one held in surety for another, generator and collector of debt, host as the one who feeds the traveler as guest, stranger to be respected even if killed, hostiles, host as an array armed for combat in the field of battle (a trial of strength). Not vermin, not trash, not inimicus, but those coproducing the engagement of war and so perhaps a new peace rather than extermination. But host has other tones too, ones that lead a little way to the chthonic and tentacular ones in the carrier bag story, where Latour and I may yet luckily be gathered and transformed by some old hag collecting dinner. We might be allowed to stay as guests, as companion species, especially if we are on the menu. The host is the habitat for the parasite, the condition of life and ongoingness for the parasite; this host is in the dangerous world-making contact zones of symbiogenesis and sympoiesis, where newly cobbled together, good-enough orders may or may not emerge from the ever so promiscuous and opportunistic associations of host and parasite. Perhaps Gaia’s unchristian abyssal gut, habitat for chthonic powers, is the muddle for sf, where ongoingness remains at stake. This is the world that evokes this chapter’s epigraph, “We are all lichens.” (On the difficulty of becoming unchristian, see Anidjar, Blood. Anidjar also does very interesting things with Schmitt.) But not so fast, my lichen selves and affiliates! First we have to wrestle with the ill-named Anthropocene. I am not against all trials of strength; after all, I love women’s basketball. I just think trials of strength are the old story. Overvalued, Notes to Chapter they are a bit like the never-ending task of cleaning the toilet—necessary but radically insufficient. On the other hand, there are excellent composting toilets . . . We can outsource some trials of strength to the ever-eager microbes to make more time and space for sf in other muddles. . Stengers, Au temps des catastrophes. Gaia intrudes in this text from p. on. Stengers discusses the “intrusion of Gaïa” in numerous interviews, essays, and lectures. Discomfort with the ever more inescapable label of the Anthropocene, in and out of sciences, politics, and culture, pervades Stengers’s thinking, as well as that of many other engaged writers, including Latour, even as we struggle for another word. See Stengers in conversation with Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin, “Matters of Cosmopolitics.” Stengers’s thinking about Gaia and the Lovelock-Margulis development of the Gaia hypothesis was from the start entwined with her work with Ilya Prigogine, which understood that strong linear coupling in complex systems theory entailed the possibility of radical global system change, including collapse. Prigogine and Stengers, Order Out of Chaos. The relation of Gaia to Chaos is an old one in science and philosophy. What I want to do is knot that emergence sympoietically into a worlding of ongoing chthonic powers, which is the material-semiotic time-space of the Chthulucene rather than Anthropocene or Capitalocene. This is part of what Stengers means when she says that her intrusive Gaia was “ticklish” from the start. “Her ‘autopoietic’ functioning is not her truth but what ‘we’ [human beings] have to face, and are able to read from our computer models, the face she turns on ‘us’” (e-mail from Stengers to Haraway, May , ). Scientists estimate that this extinction “event,” the first to occur during the time of our species, could, as previous great extinction events have, but much more rapidly, eliminate to percent of existing biodiversity. Sober estimates anticipate half of existing species of birds could disappear by . By any measure, that is a lot of double death. For a popular exposition, see Voices for Biodiversity, “The Sixth Great Extinction.” For a report by an award-winning science writer, see Kolbert, The Sixth Extinction. Reports from The Convention on Biological Diversity are more cautious about predictions and discuss the practical and theoretical difficulties of obtaining reliable knowledge, but they are not less sobering. For a disturbing report from summer , see Ceballos et al., “Accelerated Modern Human-Induced Species Losses.” Lovelock, “Gaia as Seen through the Atmosphere”; Lovelock and Margulis, “Atmospheric Homeostasis by and for the Biosphere.” For a video of a lecture to employees at the National Aeronautic and Space Agency in , go to Margulis, “Gaia Hypothesis.” Autopoiesis was crucial to Margulis’s transformative theory of symbiogenesis, but I think if she were alive to take up the question, Margulis would often prefer the terminology and figural-conceptual powers of sympoiesis. I suggest that Gaia is a system mistaken for autopoietic that is really sympoietic. See chapter , “Sympoiesis.” Gaia’s story needs an intrusive makeover to knot with a host of other promising sympoietic tentacular ones for making rich compost, for going on. Gaia or Ge is much older and wilder than Hesiod (Greek poet around the N o t e s t o C h a p t e r time of Homer, circa to bce), but Hesiod cleaned her/it up in the Theogony in his story-setting way: after Chaos, “wide-bosomed” Gaia (Earth) arose to be the everlasting seat of the immortals who possess Olympus above (Theogony, –, translated by Glenn W. Most, Loeb Classical Library), and the depths of Tartarus below (Theogony, ). The chthonic ones reply, Nonsense! Gaia is one of theirs, an ongoing tentacular threat to the astralized ones of the Olympiad, not their ground and foundation, with their ensuing generations of gods all arrayed in proper genealogies. Hesiod’s is the old prick tale, already setting up canons in the eighth century bce. Although I cannot help but think more rational environmental and socialnatural policies of all sorts would help! Isabelle Stengers, from English compilation on Gaia sent by e-mail January , . I use “thing” in two senses that rub against each other: () the collection of entities brought together in the Parliament of Things that Bruno Latour called our attention to, and () something hard to classify, unsortable, and probably with a bad smell. Latour, We Have Never Been Modern. Crutzen and Stoermer, “The ‘Anthropocene’”; Crutzen, “Geology of Mankind”; Zalasiewicz et al., “Are We Now Living in the Anthropocene?” Much earlier dates for the emergence of the Anthropocene are sometimes proposed, but most scientists and environmentalists tend to emphasize global anthropogenic effects from the late eighteenth century on. A more profound human exceptionalism (the deepest divide of nature and culture) accompanies proposals of the earliest dates, coextensive with Homo sapiens on the planet hunting big now-extinct prey and then inventing agriculture and domestication of animals. A compelling case for dating the Anthropocene from the multiple “great accelerations,” in earth system indicators and in social change indicators, from about on, first marked by atmospheric nuclear bomb explosions, is made by Steffen et al., “The Trajectory of the Anthropocene.” Zalasiewicz et al. argue that adoption of the term Anthropocene as a geological epoch by the relevant national and international scientific bodies will turn on stratigraphic signatures. Perhaps, but the resonances of the Anthropocene are much more disseminated than that. One of my favorite art investigations of the stigmata of the Anthropocene is Ryan Dewey’s “Virtual Places: Core Logging the Anthropocene in Real-Time,” in which he composes “core samples of the ad hoc geology of retail shelves.” For a powerful ethnographic encounter in the s with climate-change modeling, see Tsing, Friction, “Natural Universals and the Global Scale,” –, especially “Global Climate as a Model,” –. Tsing asks, “What makes global knowledge possible?” She replies, “Erasing collaborations.” But Tsing does not stop with this historically situated critique. Instead she, like Latour and Stengers, takes us to the really important question: “Might it be possible to attend to nature’s collaborative origins without losing the advantages of its global reach?” (). “How might scholars take on the challenge of freeing critical imaginations from the specter of neoliberal conquest—singular, universal, global? Attention to the frictions of contingent Notes to Chapter articulation can help us describe the effectiveness, and the fragility, of emergent capitalist—and globalist—forms. In this shifting heterogeneity there are new sources of hope, and, of course, new nightmares” (). At her first climate-modeling conference in , Tsing had an epiphany: “The global scale takes precedence— because it is the scale of the model” (, italics in original). But this and related properties have a particular effect: they bring negotiators to an international, heterogeneous table, maybe not heterogeneous enough, but far from full of identical units and players. “The embedding of smaller scales into the global; the enlargement of models to include everything; the policy-driven construction of the models: Together these features make it possible for the models to bring diplomats to the negotiating table” (). That is not to be despised. The reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (ipcc) are necessary documents and excellent illustrations of Tsing’s accounts: Climate Change : Mitigation of Climate Change and Climate Change : Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Tsing’s stakes in her intimate tracking of the relentless ethnographic specificities of far-flung chains of intimate dealings and livings are to hold in productive, nonutopian friction the scale-making power of the things climate-change models do with the life-and-death messiness of placeand travel-based worldings that always make even our best and most necessary universals very lumpy. She seeks and describes multiple situated worldings and multiple sorts of translations to engage globalism. “Attention to friction opens up the possibility of an ethnographic account of global interconnection” (). Appreciation of what she calls “weediness” is indispensable: “To be aware of the necessity for careful coalitions with those whose knowledges and pleasures come from other sources is the beginning of nonimperialist environmentalism” (). The hostis will not make an appearance in this string figuring, but mushrooms as guides for living in the ruins most certainly will. See Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World. The Anthropocene Working Group, which was established in to report to the International Union of Geological Sciences and the International Commission on Stratigraphy on whether to name a new epoch in the geological timeline, aimed to issue its final report in . See Newsletter of the Anthropocene Working Group, volumes and . For a photo gallery of fiery images of the Man burning at the end of the festival, see “Burning Man Festival .” Attended by tens of thousands of human people (and an unknown number of dogs), Burning Man is an annual week-long festival of art and (commercial) anarchism held in the Black Rock Desert of Nevada since and on San Francisco’s Baker Beach from to . The event’s origins tie to San Francisco artists’ celebrations of the summer solstice. “The event is described as an experiment in community, art, radical self-expression, and radical self-reliance” (“Burning Man,” Wikipedia). The globalizing extravaganzas of the Anthropocene are not the drugand art-laced worlding of Burning Man, but the iconography of the immense fiery “Man” ignited during the festival is irresistible. The first burning effigies on the beach in San Francisco were of a -foot-tall N o t e s t o C h a p t e r wooden Man and a smaller wooden dog. By the Man was feet tall and dogless. Relocated to a dry lakebed in Nevada, the Man topped out in at feet. This is America; supersized is the name of the game, a fitting habitat for the Anthropos. “Anthropos” (ἄνθρωπος) is an ambiguous word with contested etymologies. What Anthropos never figures is the rich generative home of a multispecies earth. The Online Etymology Dictionary states that it comes from the Greek aner, “man,” “as opposed to a woman, a god, or a boy.” Just what I suspected! Or, “Anthropos sometimes is explained as a compound of aner and ops (genitive opos) ‘eye, face’; so literally ‘he who has the face of a man.’” Or, sometimes, the shape of a man. Biblical scholars find it hard to make the Greek ανθρωπος include women, and it complicates translations in fascinating ways: see http://www.bible-researcher. com/anthropos.html (accessed August , ). Other sources give the meaning of the compound as “that which is below, hence earthly, human,” or, the “upward looking one,” and so below, lamentably on earth. Unlike the animals, man as anthropos “looks up at what he sees”: http://www.science-bbs.com/-lang /efbfffe.htm (accessed August , ). The Anthropos is not Latour’s Earthbound. It is safe to say that Eugene Stoermer and Paul Crutzen were not much vexed by these ambiguities. Still, thank the heavens, looking up, their human eyes were firmly on the earth’s atmospheric carbon burden. Or, also, swimming in too hot seas with the tentacular ones, their eyes were the optic-haptic fingery eyes of marine critters in diseased and dying coral symbioses. See Hayward, “FingeryEyes.” Klare, “The Third Carbon Age,” writes, “According to the International Energy Agency (iea), an inter-governmental research organization based in Paris, cumulative worldwide investment in new fossil-fuel extraction and processing will total an estimated $. trillion between and , while investment in renewables, hydropower, and nuclear energy will amount to only $. trillion.” Nuclear, after Fukushima! Not to mention that none of these calculations prioritize a much lighter, smaller, more modest human presence on earth, with all its critters. Even in its “sustainability” discourses, the Capitalocene cannot tolerate a multispecies world of the Earthbound. For the switch in Big Energy’s growth strategies to nations with the weakest environmental controls, see Klare, “What’s Big Energy Smoking?” See also Klare, The Race for What’s Left. Heavy tar sand pollution must break the hearts and shatter the gills of every Terran, Gaian, and Earthbound critter. The toxic lakes of wastewater from tar sand oil extraction in northern Alberta, Canada, shape a kind of new Great Lakes region, with more giant “ponds” added daily. Current area covered by these lakes is about percent greater than the area covered by the world city of Vancouver. Tar sands operations return almost none of the vast quantities of water they use to natural cycles. Earthbound peoples trying to establish growing things at the edges of these alarmingly colored waters filled with extraction tailings say that successional processes for re-establishing sympoietic biodiverse ecosystems, if they prove possible at all, will be an affair of decades and centuries. See Pembina Institute, “Alberta’s Notes to Chapter Oil Sands,” and Weber, “Rebuilding Land Destroyed by Oil Sands May Not Restore It.” Only Venezuela and Saudi Arabia have more oil reserves than Alberta. All that said, the Earthbound, the Terrans, do not cede either the present or the future; the sky is lowering, but has not fallen, yet. Pembina Institute, “Oil Sands Solutions.” First Nation, Métis, and Aboriginal peoples are crucial players in every aspect of this unfinished story. See the website for the Tar Sands Solutions Network. For melting sea ice in the Arctic, see figure ., p. . Photograph from nasa Earth Observatory, (public domain). If flame is the icon for the Anthropocene, I use the missing ice and the unblocked Northwest Passage to figure the Capitalocene. The Soufan Group provides strategic security intelligence services to governments and multinational organizations. Its report “tsg IntelBrief: Geostrategic Competition in the Arctic” includes the following quotes: “The Guardian estimates that the Arctic contains percent of the world’s undiscovered natural gas and percent of its oil.” “In late February, Russia announced it would form a strategic military command to protect its Arctic interests.” “Russia, Canada, Norway, Denmark, and the US all make some claim to international waters and the continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean.” “[A Northwest Passage] route could provide the Russians with a great deal of leverage on the international stage over China or any other nation dependent on sea commerce between Asia and Europe.” The province of Alberta in Canada ranks third in the world after Saudi Arabia and Venezuela for proven global crude reserves. Almost all of Alberta’s oil is in the tar sands in the north of the province, site of the great new petrotoxic lakes of North America. See Alberta Energy, “Facts and Statistics.” The Capitalocene in action! See the Indigenous Environmental Network, “Canadian Indigenous Tar Sands Campaign.” Over twenty corporations operate in the tar sands in the home area of many indigenous peoples, including the First Nation Mikisew Cree, Athabasca Chipewyan, Fort McMurray, Fort McKay Cree, Beaver Lake Cree, Chipewyan Prairie, and also the Métis. Klein, “How Science Is Telling Us All to Revolt”; Klein, The Shock Doctrine. Capitalocene is one of those words like sympoiesis; if you think you invented it, just look around and notice how many other people are inventing the term at the same time. That certainly happened to me, and after I got over a small fit of individualist pique at being asked whom I got the term Capitalocene from—hadn’t I coined the word? (“Coin”!) And why do other scholars almost always ask women which male writers their ideas are indebted to?—I recognized that not only was I part of a cat’s cradle game of invention, as always, but that Jason Moore had already written compelling arguments to think with, and my interlocutor both knew Moore’s work and was relaying it to me. Moore himself first heard the term Capitalocene in in a seminar in Lund, Sweden, when then graduate student Andreas Malm proposed it. In an urgent historical conjuncture, words-to-think-with pop out all at once from many bubbling cauldrons because we all feel the need for better netbags to collect up the stuff crying out for attention. Despite its problems, the term Anthropocene was and is embraced because it collects up many matters of fact, concern, and care; and I hope Capitalocene will roll off myriad tongues soon. N o t e s t o C h a p t e r In particular, see the work of Jason Moore, a creative Marxist sociologist at Binghamton University in New York. Moore is coordinator of the World-Ecology Research Network. For his first Capitalocene argument, see Moore, “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, and the Myth of Industrialization.” See Moore, Capitalism and the Web of Life. To get over Eurocentrism while thinking about the history of pathways and centers of globalization over the last few centuries, see Flynn and Giráldez, China and the Birth of Globalisation in the th Century. For analysis attentive to the differences and frictions among colonialisms, imperialisms, globalizing trade formations, and capitalism, see Ho, “Empire through Diasporic Eyes” and The Graves of Tarem. In “Anthropocene or Capitalocene, Part III,” Jason Moore puts it this way: “This means that capital and power—and countless other strategic relations—do not act upon nature but develop through the web of life. ‘Nature’ is here offered as the relation of the whole. Humans live as a specifically endowed (but not special) environment-making species within Nature. Second, capitalism in was no Athena, bursting forth, fully grown and armed, from the head of a carboniferous Zeus. Civilizations do not form through Big Bang events. They emerge through cascading transformations and bifurcations of human activity in the web of life . . . [For example,] the long seventeenth century forest clearances of the Vistula Basin and Brazil’s Atlantic Rainforest occurred on a scale, and at a speed, between five and ten times greater than anything seen in medieval Europe.” Crist, “On the Poverty of Our Nomenclature,” . Crist does superb critique of the traps of Anthropocene discourse, as well as gives us propositions for more imaginative worlding and ways to stay with the trouble. For entangled, dissenting papers that both refuse and take up the name Anthropocene, see videos from the conference “Anthropocene Feminism.” For rich interdisciplinary research, organized by Anna Tsing and Nils Ole Bubandt, that brings together anthropologists, biologists, and artists under the sign of the Anthropocene, see aura: Aarhus University Research on the Anthropocene. I owe the insistence on “big-enough stories” to Clifford, Returns: “I think of these as ‘big enough’ histories, able to account for a lot, but not for everything—and without guarantees of political virtue” (). Rejecting one big synthetic account or theory, Clifford works to craft a realism that “works with open-ended (because their linear historical time is ontologically unfinished) ‘big-enough stories,’ sites of contact, struggle, and dialogue” (–). Pignarre and Stengers, La sorcellerie capitaliste. Latour and Stengers are deeply allied in their fierce rejection of discourses of denunciation. They have both patiently taught me to understand and relearn in this matter. I love a good denunciation! It is a hard habit to unlearn. It is possible to read Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno’s Dialectic of Enlightenment as an allied critique of Progress and Modernization, even though their resolute secularism gets in their own way. It is very hard for a secularist to really listen to the squid, bacteria, and angry old women of Terra/Gaia. The most likely Western Marxist allies, besides Marx, for nurturing the Chthulucene in the belly Notes to Chapter of the Capitalocene are Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, and Stuart Hall. Hall’s immensely generative essays extend from the s through the s. See, for example, Morley and Chen, Stuart Hall. See Gilson, “Octopi Wall Street!” for the fascinating history of cephalopods figuring the depredations of Big Capital in the United States (for example, the early twentieth-century John D. Rockefeller/Standard Oil octopus strangling workers, farmers, and citizens in general with its many huge tentacles). Resignification of octopuses and squids as chthonic allies is excellent news. May they squirt inky night into the visualizing apparatuses of the technoid sky gods. Hesiod’s Theogony in achingly beautiful language tells of Gaia/Earth arising out of Chaos to be the seat of the Olympian immortals above and of Tartarus in the depths below. She/it is very old and polymorphic and exceeds Greek tellings, but just how remains controversial and speculative. At the very least, Gaia is not restricted to the job of holding up the Olympians! The important and unorthodox scholar-archaeologist Marija Gimbutas claims that Gaia as Mother Earth is a later form of a pre–Indo-European, Neolithic Great Mother. In , filmmaker Donna Reed and neopagan author and activist Starhawk released a collaborative documentary film about the life and work of Gimbutas, Signs out of Time. See Belili Productions, “About Signs out of Time”; Gimbutas, The Living Goddesses. To understand what is at stake in “non-Euclidean” storytelling, go to Le Guin, Always Coming Home and “A Non-Euclidean View of California as a Cold Place to Be.” “The Thousand Names of Gaia: From the Anthropocene to the Age of the Earth,” International Colloquium, Rio de Janeiro, September –, . The bee was one of Potnia Theron’s emblems, and she is also called Potnia Melissa, Mistress of the Bees. Modern Wiccans re-member these chthonic beings in ritual and poetry. If fire figured the Anthropocene, and ice marked the Capitalocene, it pleases me to use red clay pottery for the Chthulucene, a time of fire, water, and earth, tuned to the touch of its critters, including its people. With her PhD writing on the riverine goddess Ratu Kidul and her dances now performed on Bali, Raissa DeSmet (Trumbull) introduced me to the web of far-traveling chthonic tentacular ones emerging from the Hindu serpentine Nagas and moving through the waters of Southeast Asia. DeSmet, A Liquid World. Links between Potnia Theron and the Gorgon/Medusa continued in temple architecture and building adornment well after bce, giving evidence of the tenacious hold of the chthonic powers in practice, imagination, and ritual, for example, from the fifth through the third centuries bce on the Italian peninsula. The dread-full Gorgon figure faces outward, defending against exterior dangers, and the no less awe-full Potnia Theron faces inward, nurturing the webs of living. See Busby, The Temple Terracottas of Etruscan Orvieto. The Christian Mary, Virgin Mother of God, who herself erupted in the Near East and Mediterranean worlds, took on attributes of these and other chthonic powers in her travels around the world. Unfortunately, Mary’s iconography shows her ringed by stars and crushing the head of the snake (for example, in the Miraculous Medal dating from an early N o t e s t o C h a p t e r nineteenth-century apparition of the Virgin), more than allying herself with earth powers. The “lady surrounded by stars” is a Christian scriptural apocalyptic figure for the end of time. That is a bad idea. Throughout my childhood, I wore a gold chain with the Miraculous Medal. Finally and luckily, it was her residual chthonic infections that took hold in me, turning me from both the secular and also the sacred, and toward humus and compost. The Hebrew word Deborah means “bee,” and she was the only female judge mentioned in the Bible. She was a warrior and counselor in premonarchic Israel. The Song of Deborah may date to the twelfth century bce. Deborah was a military hero and ally of Jael, one of the Js in Joanna Russ’s formative feminist science fiction novel The Female Man. In April , the Reverend Billy Talen and the Church of Stop Shopping exorcised the robobee from the Micro Robotics Laboratories at Harvard. The robobee is a high-tech drone bee that is intended to replace overworked and poisoned biological pollinating bees as they become more and more diseased and endangered. Honeybeealujah, old stories live! See Talen, “Beware of the Robobee,” and Finnegan, “Protestors Sing Honeybeelujahs against Robobees.” Or, as Brad Werner put it at the American Geophysical Union Meetings, Revolt! Do we hear the buzzing yet? It is time to sting. It is time for a chthonic swarm. It is time to take care of the bees. “Erinyes .” Martha Kenney pointed out to me that the story of the Ood, in the long-running British science fiction tv series Doctor Who, shows how the squid-faced ones became deadly to humanity only after they were mutilated, cut off from their symchthonic hive mind, and enslaved. The humanoid empathic Ood have sinuous tentacles over the lower portion of their multifolded alien faces; and in their proper bodies they carry their hindbrains in their hands, communicating with each other telepathically through these vulnerable, living, exterior organs (organons). Humans (definitely not the Earthbound) cut off the hindbrains and replaced them with a technological communication-translator sphere, so that the isolated Ood could only communicate through their enslavers, who forced them into hostilities. I resist thinking the Ood techno-communicators are a future release of the iPhone, but it is tempting when I watch the faces of twenty-first-century humans on the streets, or even at the dinner table, apparently connected only to their devices. I am saved from this ungenerous fantasy by the sf fact that in the episode “Planet of the Ood,” the tentacular ones were freed by the actions of Ood Sigma and restored to their nonsingular selves. Doctor Who is a much better story cycle for going-onwith than Star Trek. For the importance of reworking fables in sciences and other knowledge practices, see Kenney, “Fables of Attention.” Kenney explores different genres of fable, which situate what she calls unstable “wild facts” in relation to proposing and testing the strength of knowledge claims. She investigates strategies for navigating uncertain terrain, where the productive tensions between fact and fiction in actual practices are necessary. Notes to Chapter “Medousa and Gorgones.” Suzy McKee Charnas’s Holdfast Chronicles, beginning in with Walk to the End of the World, is great sf for thinking about feminists and their horses. The sex is exciting if very incorrect, and the politics are bracing. Eva Hayward first drew my attention to the emergence of Pegasus from Medusa’s body and of coral from drops of her blood. Hayward, “The Crochet Coral Reef Project,” writes: “If coral teaches us about the reciprocal nature of life, then how do we stay obligated to environments—many of which we made unlivable—that now sicken us? . . . Perhaps Earth will follow Venus, becoming uninhabitable due to rampaging greenhouse effect. Or, maybe, we will rebuild reefs or construct alternate homes for the oceans’ refugees. Whatever the conditions of our future, we remain obligate partners with oceans.” See Wertheim and Wertheim, Crochet Coral Reef. I am inspired by the – Monterey Bay Aquarium exhibition Tentacles: The Astounding Lives of Octopuses, Squids, and Cuttlefish. See Detienne and Vernant, Cunning Intelligence in Greek Culture and Society, with thanks to Chris Connery for this reference in which cuttlefish, octopuses, and squid play a large role. Polymorphy, the capacity to make a net or mesh of bonds, and cunning intelligence are the traits the Greek writers foregrounded. “Cuttlefish and octopuses are pure áporai and the impenetrable pathless night they secrete is the most perfect image of their metis” (). Chapter , “The Orphic Metis and the Cuttle-Fish of Thetis,” is the most interesting for the Chthulucene’s own themes of ongoing looping, becoming-with, and polymorphism. “The suppleness of molluscs, which appear as a mass of tentacles (polúplokoi), makes their bodies an interlaced network, a living knot of mobile animated bonds” (). For Detienne and Vernant’s Greeks, the polymorphic and supple cuttlefish are close to the primordial multisexual deities of the sea—ambiguous, mobile and ever changing, sinuous and undulating, presiding over coming-to-be, pulsating with waves of intense color, cryptic, secreting clouds of darkness, adept at getting out of difficulties, and having tentacles where proper men would have beards. See Haraway and Kenney, “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene.” Le Guin, “‘The Author of Acacia Seeds’ and Other Extracts from the Journal of the Association of Therolinguistics,” . Chapter : Sympoiesis This chapter is written in honor of Lynn Margulis (–) and Alison Jolly (–). See Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna). The large high-resolution giclée reproduction was printed on canvas with nonfading inks. Inspired by Margulis and Sagan, Dazzle Gradually, Dubiner’s original gouache painting was by inches. Dubiner wrote, “The large red protozoan is Urostyla grandis based on a drawing by Stein in Leipzig. The purple protozoan N o t e s t o C h a p t e r with rows of cilia is Didinium . . . The blue feathered dragon-like creature at the center was inspired by a microscope image of a phospholipid cylinder by David Deamer . . . I wanted individual organisms to be accurate enough so a biologist would recognize them, but I allowed the overall painting to be a totally imaginary bioscape” (Dubiner, “New Painting”). For her blog writing on the painting, see Dubiner, “‘Endosymbiosis.’” John Feldman is making a documentary film titled Symbiotic Earth: How Lynn Margulis Rocked the Boat and Started a Scientific Revolution. Born in , Margulis died in . On her UMass Amherst website, she described herself as a professor of microbial evolution and organelle heredity. See Mazur, “Intimacy of Strangers and Natural Selection”; Margulis, Symbiotic Planet; Margulis and Sagan, Microcosmos; Margulis and Sagan, Acquiring Genomes. See Hird, The Origins of Sociable Life, an important work rooted in ethnographic sociology in Margulis’s laboratory. In , “Margulis proposed any physical association between individuals of different species for significant portions of their lifetime constitutes a ‘symbiosis’ and that all participants are bionts, such that the resulting association is a holobiont” (Walters, “Holobionts and the Hologenome Theory”). See Margulis, “Symbiogenesis and Symbionticism.” In the term holobiont was used by Mindell, “Phylogenetic Consequences of Symbioses,” to describe a host and its primary symbiont. In the same issue of this journal, see Margulis, “Biodiversity.” Subsequently, Rohwer et al., “Diversity and Distribution of Coral-Associated Bacteria,” used holobiont to mean the host plus all of its symbiotic microorganisms, including viruses. For an excellent recent summary of principles for holobionts and hologenomes, which nonetheless cannot evade the language of “host plus the rest,” see Bordenstein and Theis, “Host Biology in Light of the Microbiome.” “Safe and sound” as a meaning for holois from the Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed March , . Margulis, then publishing as Lynn Sagan, published her radical theory of the origin of the nucleated cell in . Like many revolutionary contributions in science, such as Raymond Lindeman’s paradigm-resetting “Trophic-Dynamic Aspect of Ecology,” Margulis’s paper was rejected many times before being accepted for publication. See Sagan, “On the Origin of Mitosing Cells”; Margulis, “ArchaealEubacterial Mergers in the Origin of Eukarya.” For an explication of Margulis’s autopoiesis and strong argument for continued use of the concept for Margulis’s essential work on second-order Gaian systems theory, see Clarke, “Autopoiesis and the Planet.” Lovelock, “Gaia as Seen through the Atmosphere”; Lovelock and Margulis, “Atmospheric Homeostasis by and for the Biosphere.” Autopoietic systems theory and the figure of Gaia proved crucial to formulating the concept of the Anthropocene. Not a nurturing mother, Gaia can flip out, in system collapse after system collapse; there are limits to the power of systemic processes of homeostasis and reformulating order out of chaos at ever more complex levels. Complexity can unravel; earth can die. It matters to become response-able. Dempster, “A Self-Organizing Systems Perspective on Planning for Sustainability.” In Dempster thought that biology supported the conceptualization of Notes to Chapter organisms as units, and only ecosystems and cultures are sympoietic. I argue, on biological grounds, that we can no longer think like that. Margulis and Sagan, “The Beast with Five Genomes.” Poulsen et al., “Complementary Symbiont Contributions to Plant Decomposition in a Fungus Farming Termite.” On these termite-bacterial-fungal symbioses, see the superb science writer Yong, “The Guts That Scrape the Skies.” For a closely argued analysis of the dead ends of competition/cooperation binaries and the relentless assumption that explanation in the last instance in biology must be competitive and individualistic, as well as for a fleshed-out description of more adequate explanatory practices, which are more and more in play among venturesome evolutionary, ecological, and behavioral biologists, see van Dooren and Despret, “Evolution.” Gilbert and Epel (Ecological Developmental Biology) document the evidence for what the authors call an “extended evolutionary synthesis,” encompassing the modern synthesis, eco-devo, and eco-evo-devo. Mereschkowsky, “Theorie der zwei Plasmaarten als Grundlage der Symbiogenesis.” See also Anonymous, “History.” Gilbert, “The Adequacy of Model Systems for Evo-Devo,” . See Black, Models and Metaphors; Frigg and Hartman, “Models in Science”; Haraway, Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields. “King Lab: Choanoflagellates and the Origin of Animals.” Alegado and King, “Bacterial Influences on Animal Origins.” Choanoflagellates and their bacterial associates make an attractive model partly because sponges, long held to be the “most primitive” critters most closely related to animals, have choanoflagellate-like cells in their bodies that do things like capture their prey (bacteria and detritus). However, recent work argues that ctenophores (comb jellies) are genetically more closely related to animals than sponges are. Halanych, “The Ctenophore Lineage Is Older Than Sponges?” See Ed Yong’s beautifully written science news story “Consider the Sponge.” I do not know of any work exploring ctenophore-bacteria interactions, although, managing infections and responding to biofilm formations, ctenophores are tuned to bacteria and archaea, as are we all. In any case, phylogenetic relationships are not the only criteria of a good model. Up to percent of the biomass of sponges is microbes. See Hill, Lopez, and Harriott, “Sponge-Specific Bacterial Symbionts in the Caribbean Sponge.” What a gold mine for the study of holobionts! No wonder Nicole King started looking into all those attachment sites and signaling activities that might tie choanoflagellate-like cells in sponges to her free-living choanoflagellates, their eating, their infections, and their rosette clumping habits. If anything is, eating—not fundamentalist neo-Darwinian selfishness—is “evolutionary explanation in the last instance”; and eating is definitely both infectious and social! Biologically, eating trumps sex for innovative power; and eating is what made sex possible in the first place. McGowan, “Where Animals Come From”; Yong, “Bacteria Transform the Closest Living Relatives of Animals from Single Cells into Colonies.” N o t e s t o C h a p t e r McFall-Ngai, “Divining the Essence of Symbiosis,” . See McFall-Ngai’s website from the University of Wisconsin. She has since moved to the Pacific Biosciences Research Center at the University of Hawaii. Other emerging model systems for symbiosis tuned to EcoEvoDevo include mouse gut development with bacterial symbionts (Jeffrey Gordon’s lab at Washington University in St. Louis) and mouse brain development as well as immune system development tuned to signals from specific gut bacteria (Sarkis Mazmanian’s lab at CalTech). See also EcoEvoDevo research with spadefoot toads (David Pfennig’s lab at unc Chapel Hill). Working on pea aphid symbiosis with Buchnera, Nancy Moran’s lab at the University of Texas has done wonderful work on the coevolution of aphids and symbionts, but they have not emphasized development. Thanks to Scott Gilbert, personal communication, June , . The inaugural meeting of the Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology was held August –, , on the campus of University of California, Berkeley. Out of three hundred EvoDevo scientists who indicated an interest in attending, the ten organizers invited twenty-five attendees from a broad range of scientific backgrounds and approaches and set up an online portal for other EvoDevo participants. The European Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology was founded in Prague in . The international research community in EcoDevo and EvoDevo, as well as EcoEvoDevo, is both sizable and growing. Rudolf Raff edits the journal Evolution and Development, founded in . See Abouheif et al., “Eco-Evo-Devo.” A strong Russian tradition established by late nineteenthand early twentieth-century workers contributed prominently to the conceptual formation of what became EvoDevo and EcoDevo. See Olsson, Levit, and Hossfeld, “Evolutionary Developmental Biology.” See also Tauber, “Reframing Developmental Biology and Building Evolutionary Theory’s New Synthesis.” McFall-Ngai, “Divining the Essence of Symbiosis.” Moran, “Research in the Moran Lab,” website for “Nancy Moran’s Lab.” See Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber, “A Symbiotic View of Life”; McFall-Ngai et al., “Animals in a Bacterial World.” This multiauthored paper is the result of a workshop supported by the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (nesc). Michael Hadfield first introduced me to Margaret McFall-Ngai in Hawaii in , and their collaborative thinking and publishing deeply informs mine. Asking Sapp (a historian of biology who writes on evolutionary biology beyond the neo-Darwinian framework) and Tauber (biochemist, philosopher, and historian of science who writes on immunology) to join him, Gilbert (developmental biologist and historian of biology) cowrote a separate paper because of unresolved disagreement at the nesc workshop over the extent of deviation from neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory (“competition in the last instance” and the power of cheaters in evolutionary game theory) that is in Gilbert’s theory of the holobiont as a unit of selection. Gilbert thinks immune systems are very good at managing a dialogue with (not exterminating) cooperation-destroying cheaters in holobionts. Gilbert et al., “Symbiosis as a Source of Selectable Epigenetic Variation.” Gilbert emphasizes that we have always been lichens. See also Guerrero, Margulis, and Berlanga, “Symbiogenesis.” Notes to Chapter McFall-Ngai et al., “Animals in a Bacterial World,” . At Hadfield and McFall-Ngai’s request, I provided minor help in revising the introduction and conclusion to McFall-Ngai et al., “Animals in a Bacterial World.” Hadfield began teaching me about invertebrate marine developmental and ecological biology in the early s when we were in a commune together in Honolulu. Gilbert and I have been close friends and colleagues exchanging papers and ideas since he was a PhD biology student at the Johns Hopkins University, and I was an assistant professor in the History of Science Department and Gilbert’s advisor for his simultaneous ma in history of science. Wertheim, A Field Guide to Hyperbolic Space. Hyperbolic space might be defined as “an excess of surface,” the title of the first section of Wertheim’s book. The very existence of such a thing seemed frankly pathological to Euclidean thinkers until the curves of worlding became undeniable to mathematicians. Such crenellated realities had long been in the repertoire of other critters, including a proud woman of the silk-weaving families in nineteenth-century Spitalfields, as she crocheted a nice ruffle onto the edges of a milk jug cover while she listened to Darwin talking about fancy racing pigeons with her husband and sons. Hustak and Myers, “Involutionary Momentum,” , , . Hustak and Myers, “Involutionary Momentum,” . xkcd, Bee Orchid, https://xkcd.com//, accessed August , . Although gone from everywhere but one region, the not-quite-extinct solitary bee is from the genus Eucera. The orchid is Ophrys apifera. See “Bee Orchid.” On resurgence, see Tsing, “A Threat to Holocene Resurgence Is a Threat to Livability.” Tsing argues that the Holocene was, and still is in some places, the long period when refugia, places of refuge, still existed, even abounded, to sustain reworlding in rich cultural and biological diversity after tremendous disturbance. Perhaps the outrage meriting a name like Anthropocene is about the destruction of places and times of refuge for people and other critters. My Chthulucene, even burdened with its problematic Greek-ish tendrils, entangles myriad temporalities and spatialities and diverse intra-active entities-in-assemblages—including the more-thanhuman, other-than-human, inhuman, and human-as-humus. The symchthonic ones are not extinct, but they are mortal. One way to live and die well as mortal critters in the Chthulucene is to join forces to reconstitute refuges, to make possible partial and robust biological-cultural-political-technological recuperation and recomposition, which must include mourning irreversible losses. Meaning “real or genuine person,” Inupiaq refers both to the person and to the language, which is closely related to Canadian Inuit and Greenlandic dialects and is distinct from the Yupik of western Alaska. Referring to the people collectively, Inupiat is the plural of Inupiaq. See University of Alaska Fairbanks, “Alaska Native Language Center.” “Crochet Coral Reef”; “Ako Project”; “Never Alone”; “Black Mesa Water Coalition”; “Black Mesa Trust” (founded by Hopi activists); “Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land”; “Navajo Sheep Project”; “Diné be’iiná/The Navajo Lifeway”; “Black Mesa Indigenous Support.” N o t e s t o C h a p t e r Hustak and Myers, “Involutionary Momentum,” . In “Welcome to a New Planet,” Michael Klare cites the figure from the World Wildlife Fund report in September of million people depending on coral reef ecologies for food security. The same report notes that percent of the reefs are listed officially as “threatened” in the so-called coral triangle, which encompasses the waters of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and Timor Leste, including Raja Ampat off the coast of West Papua, considered the global epicenter of marine biodiversity. Irreversible failure of the reefs, a real possibility by as early as , could set off human misery and mass migrations of unprecedented proportions, not to mention nonhuman misery and double death. Climate justice and environmental justice are truly multispecies affairs. Raja Ampat is also the epicenter of ongoing innovative coalitional work for resurgence. See World Wildlife Fund, “Living Blue Planet.” The deepwater coral refugia hypothesis is difficult to test, but see Greenwood, “Hope from the Deep.” “The regrowing forest is an example of what I am calling resurgence. The crossspecies relations that make forests possible are renewed in the regrowing forest. Resurgence is the work of many organisms, negotiating across differences, to forge assemblages of multispecies livability in the midst of disturbance. Humans cannot continue their livelihoods without it” (Tsing, “A Threat to Holocene Resurgence Is a Threat to Livability”). Not all reforestation is equal, not everything that grows on disturbed land constitutes resurgence. Reforestation in Madagascar with native species is very difficult because the soils of deforested areas are severely damaged. Reforestation with exotic species, some of which become invasive, is practiced with eucalyptus, pine, silver wattle (an acacia), silky oak, and paperbark. See “Deforestation in Madagascar.” Plantation system “reforestation,” for example, with oil palms, has not been common until recently in Madagascar. For an example of Navajo, Hopi, and settler environmental alliance, see “Sierra Club Sponsors ‘Water Is Life’ Forum with Tribal Partners.” The Sierra Club was a major ally with Black Mesa Navajo and Hopi activists who shut down the Mohave Generating Station and the Black Mesa mine in . See Francis, Voices from Dzil’íjiin (Black Mesa). The Sierra Club was founded in the late nineteenth century as a white settler colony institution joining the category of nature to conservation, eugenics, and native exclusion from land. The Sierra Club’s current efforts to learn to be a decolonial ally with indigenous peoples is heartening. Lustgarten, “End of the Miracle Machines.” Lustgarten’s twelve-part series from ProPublica, “Killing the Colorado,” is indispensable reading for thinking about how to nurture the Chthulucene in the midst of the Anthropocene’s practices of fossil making by ceaseless fossil burning. The website of Peabody Energy insists on a very different picture, one filled with restored native plants, productive revitalized grasslands, prize-winning safety records, economic benefits for everybody, and happy people. In , “Peabody’s environmental and community practices on Black Mesa were recognized as a world model for sustainability at the Energy Globe Awards in Brussels, Belgium” Notes to Chapter (Peabody Energy, “Powder River Basin and Southwest”); see also Peabody Energy, “Factsheet: Kayenta.” In the early s Fred Palmer, Peabody’s main lobbyist in for government affairs, founded the Greening Earth Society, which actively promoted the idea that climate change is beneficial to plants and public health. Peabody Energy led the charge against President Obama’s efforts at the end of his second term to regulate coal emissions more forcefully through the epa. In the s, as its chief environmental officer, Peabody hired Craig Idso, cofounder and former president of the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, a think tank dedicated to attacking mainstream climate science. Greg Boyce, Peabody’s ceo in , regularly criticizes “flawed computer models” as the basis of “climate theory.” See Goldenberg, “The Truth behind Peabody Energy’s Campaign to Rebrand Coal as a Poverty Cure.” Critical to the industry’s attempt to rebrand coal-generated electricity as the solution for the world’s poor, Peabody is a major force behind Advanced Energy for Life. “Advanced Energy for Life” produces a slick procoal website that argues that more not less investment in coal, coupled to ever more elaborate and expensive technologies, is critical to global well-being. Peabody Energy is the only non-China-based partner in the Shenhua Coal Group. See Peabody Energy, “Peabody in China.” Nonetheless, Peabody is facing serious economic losses as the global coal industry becomes less and less sustainable in the face of competition from fracking-related natural gas abundance. Including the People’s Climate Movement and the Indigenous Environmental Movement, among others, the growing global movement to leave fossil fuels in the ground could have profound effects. “Leave It in the Ground,” http://leave-it-in-the-ground.org/, accessed March , . Peabody Energy declared bankruptcy in . For pictures of the Navajo Generating Station and much more, see Friberg, “Picturing the Drought.” For the Black Mesa mine site, see the photos by Minkler in “Paatuaqatsi/Water Is Life.” For Navajo-Hopi-Peabody issues on Black Mesa, see Nies, “The Black Mesa Syndrome: Indian Lands, Black Gold.” This is my source for the $. million payout to Boyden. See Nies, Unreal City; Ali, Mining, the Environment, and Indigenous Development Conflicts, –. For Navajo voices, see Benally, Bitter Water. See the Academy Award–winning documentary film () by Floria and Mudd, Broken Rainbow, on the scandal of coal extraction and the relocation of Navajo from Black Mesa, beginning in , to aid mining speculation. I am indebted to many activist sources for my condensed synopsis of Black Mesa issues: Lacerenza, “An Historical Overview of the Navajo Relocation”; “Short History of Big Mountain–Black Mesa”; Begaye, “The Black Mesa Controversy”; Rowe, “Coal Mining on Navajo Nation in Arizona Takes Heavy Toll”; Black Mesa Water Coalition, “Our Work.” Wertheim, A Field Guide to Hyperbolic Space, . Wertheim and Wertheim, Crochet Coral Reef, . This is a two-hundred-plus-page book of sumptuous photographs and astute essays, plus the names of everybody who crocheted for this experimental art science model ecosystem. N o t e s t o C h a p t e r New Zealand tv series, –. “Dreamworker” was an episode of series , in September , when I imagine Christine and Margaret glued to the screen, concocting their own material dream passage. “Gabrielle is kidnapped to become the bride of Morpheus, the god of dream, so Xena has to go through her Dreamscape Passage to save her friend.” See Xena Warrior Princess, “Dreamworker.” On the crochet coral reefs as experimental life-forms, in some ways analogous to ALife worlds, but with very different narrative, material, political, and human and nonhuman social ecologies, see Roosth, “Evolutionary Yarns in Seahorse Valley.” Wertheim and Wertheim, Crochet Coral Reef, . See Hayward, “The Crochet Coral Reef Project.” Wertheim and Wertheim, Crochet Coral Reef, . Wertheim and Wertheim, Crochet Coral Reef, . Wertheim and Wertheim, Crochet Coral Reef, . Margaret Wertheim, “The Beautiful Math of Coral.” Christine Wertheim, “CalArts Faculty Staff Directory.” Metcalf, “Intimacy without Proximity.” See the Australian Earth Laws Alliance website. This uncredited photo appears on http://www.earthlaws.org.au/wp-content/uploads///turtle-and-reef.jpg, as well as many other places on the Internet, always uncredited. Accessed August , . The geo-eco-techno materiality of visual cultures matters to holding open space for critters in place. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “Green Turtles.” See “Ako Project: The Books,” written by Alison Jolly, illustrated by Deborah Ross, Malagasy text by Hantanirina Rasamimanana, –. The Lemur Conservation Foundation publishes the books in the United States and Canada. The books are published by unicef in Madagascar (fifteen thousand of each book and six thousand of each poster). Outside Madagascar, unilingual books are available in English and Chinese, with more translations planned. Each book features a different lemur species in a different kind of habitat, including the aye-aye, ring-tailed lemurs, sifaka, indri, red ruffed lemurs, and mouse lemurs. See Jolly, Thank You, Madagascar, for a funny, astute, quirky, informed, gorgeously written, often tragic account of major tangles in the history of Malagasy-Western conservation encounters and projects over the late twentieth and early twentyfirst centuries, all of which Jolly participated in. I am grateful to Jolly’s daughter Margaretta Jolly for copies of documents and correspondence on the Ako Project. Patricia Wright, a friend and colleague of Alison’s, must also be foregrounded for her extraordinary knowledge and work; Wright plays a large role in Thank You, Madagascar. Without her, Ranomafana National Park, with its projects for Malagasy and foreign scientists, wildlife, and local people, would not exist. See “Centre ValBio: Ranomafana National Park”; “Patricia Wright”; and Wright and Andriamihaja, “Making a Rain Forest National Park Work in Madagascar.” None of that stops me—or Jolly or Wright—from recording that many local people around the park consider that their land, including graves of their ancestors, was illegitimately taken from them to make the park and its kind of boundaries in ongoing scientific Notes to Chapter and state colonial practices. Similarly, none of that stops informed players in this region from judging that the trees and critters of this specific area would now be gone if the park had failed; there is no innocent or simple way to stay with all the faces of the trouble; that is precisely why we must do so. See Jolly, Thank You, Madagascar, –. Shifting cultivators like the Malagasy, who clear small hillside plots and also use irrigated paddies for rice, are conventionally accused of destroying land and its future productivity; the truth has often been the opposite. The issue is controversial, but see Survival International, “Shifting Cultivation,” and Cairns, Shifting Cultivation and Environmental Change. Kull, Isle of Fire, is the harshest critic of the history of conservation through fire suppression in Madagascar. He argues for communitybased fire management rather than ongoing—and ineffective—criminalization of burning. Regeneration from plots used by shifting cultivators and then left fallow has been critical to forest species diversity and abundance in most tropical areas for a long time—unless fallow times are too short and pressure for new croplands too heavy. Private property regimes and their state apparatuses have a hard time with shifting cultivators (and with pastoralists called nomads). To put it mildly, the state wants people to settle down with definite property boundaries. In solidarity with other pastoral/mobile peoples pressed by centralizing, resource-extracting, national governments, on July , , the Black Mesa Water Coalition (bmwc) posted on its Facebook page a New York Times article on the current Chinese government’s efforts to settle, forcibly if necessary, the “nomads” of its tribal western regions. The relation of the stepped-up efforts of sedentarization are hardly independent of intensified coal and other energy and mineral extraction in western China, and similar forces on Black Mesa on Navajo and Hopi lands since the mid-nineteenth century. See Jacobs, “China Fences in Its Nomads.” The poster for bmwc commented, “This story sounds very familiar doesn’t it? It’s like what bia has been doing to Diné people and it continues to happen today on npl and hpl.” npl, Navajo Partition Lands; hpl, Hopi Partition Lands. https://www. facebook.com/blackmesawc?fref=ts. Accessed August , . See the last section of this chapter, “Navajo Weaving.” A recent study in Madagascar attempted to quantify whether and how much fallow times have decreased in shifting cultivation/tavy land use in one rain forest corridor region of eastern Madagascar. The study claims to have instigated methods to ensure taking the knowledge systems and statements of both agricultural experts and local farmers equally seriously. See the conclusion in Styger et al., “Influence of Slash-and-Burn Farming Practices on Fallow Succession and Land Degradation in the Rainforest Region of Madagascar,” : “Over the last years, fallow periods decreased from – years to – years. Hence, fallow vegetation is changing within – fallow/cropping cycles after deforestation from tree (Trema orientalis) to shrub (Psiadia altissima, Rubus moluccanus, Lantana camara) to herbaceous fallows (Imperata cylindrical and ferns) and grasslands (Aristida sp.), when land falls out of crop production. This sequence is – times faster than previously reported. The frequent use of fire is replacing native species with exotic, ag N o t e s t o C h a p t e r gressive ones and favors grasses over woody species, creating treeless landscapes that are of minimal productive and ecological value.” The study highlights that the local people, the Betsimisaraka, have rich knowledge of fallowing and regeneration but are pressed by multiple forces in a spiraling process of land degradation. Ecological, ethnic, social hierarchal, populational, regional, national, international, and economic pressures tangle to strangle biodiversity and diverse livelihoods for people and other critters. Typically, shifting cultivators have not traditionally wanted large families and have used many means to limit births. Why demographic spirals and land pressure have developed as they have since the mid-twentieth century in the upland rice plots and forests of Madagascar is not simple; but private property, nation state, and colonial apparatuses bear much of the responsibility, but not all the responsibility; the heavy toll of human numbers on today’s earth cannot be addressed by laying all the responsibility on someone else’s plate (or womb). Population in Madagascar is hard to estimate in part because no census has been taken since ; the first census was taken in . The “method” for the following statements is inference: “According to the revision of the World Population Prospects the total population was ,, in , compared to only ,, in . . . un projections give about million by . Birthrates have fallen in both urban and rural areas, more in urban. percent of population is rural/subsistence farming” (United Nations, “World Population Prospects”). Deborah Ross is a book artist with work in major magazines and in zoos and botanical gardens. She has run watercolor workshops for Walt Disney Studios, DreamWorks, Pixar, and Cal Arts. Most significant for the Ako Project have been her rural art workshops for the Malagasy villagers of Kirindy and Tampolo. See Ross, “Deborah Ross Arts.” With degrees in scientific illustration and ecology and environment, Janet Mary Robinson is the poster artist for the Ako Project. Thanks to Margaretta Jolly for information on the origin of the project; e-mail from Jolly to Haraway, June , . Jolly, “Alison Jolly and Hantanirina Rasamimanana,” . For the story of her first meeting and then working with Rasamimanana, see Jolly, Lords and Lemurs. For a taste of Rasamimanana and Jolly thinking with each other as scientists, see Jolly et al., “Territory as Bet-Hedging.” Without giving up, Jolly laments that even Rasamimanana’s promotion of teaching and research related to the Ako books has not yet been able to overcome the reticence of many teachers to use such unorthodox materials. Jolly, Thank You, Madagascar, . In “Conservation Education in Madagascar,” Dolins et al. argue “that while nongovernmental organizational efforts are and will be very important, the Ministry of Education urgently needs to incorporate biodiversity education in the curriculum at all levels, from primary school to university” (abstract). Fifth International Prosimian Congress, website; Durrell Wildlife Conservation, “World Primate Experts Focus on Madagascar.” For a list of related publications, see ValBio, “icte-Centre ValBio Publications.” Jolly, Thank You, Madagascar, . Notes to Chapter The quotation is the English subtitle on a screen shot in Never Alone, Announcement Trailer, showing Nuna, the arctic fox, and a spirit helper. For extracts from an interview with Amy Fredeen of the Cook Inlet Tribal Council and Sean Vesce of E-Line Media for National Public Radio, see Demby, “Updating Centuries-Old Folktales with Puzzles and Power-Ups.” From the interview: “The last living person to tell the story was a master storyteller named Robert Cleveland. Amy and her team did an amazing job, and they located the oldest living offspring of Robert—a woman named Minnie Gray, who is in her s, I believe. They discovered that Minnie lived just a few blocks from the Cook Inlet Tribal Council headquarters. And we brought her in and we were able to start a series of conversations with her. We introduced her to the team and what we wanted to do. And we were delighted when she really was encouraging us not only to use her father’s story for inspiration, but to adapt it and evolve it for the game context. One of the things she taught us was that storytelling is not a fixed act.” The process of making the game is described in detail. One consequential decision: “We made the creative decision to keep the only [spoken] audio in the game in Inupiaq, and it’s presented in languages for subtitles. What we were looking to do was re-create the experience of being told a story by an elder in their own language. It’s hard to describe that sense, but we wanted to try to re-create that for players so they got a sense of how powerful it would have been to hear one of these stories back then.” In the interview, Amy Fredeen quotes Daniel Starkey, an American Indian game reviewer on Eurogamer. net, who writes, “Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna in Inupiaq) is different. Its very existence challenges me. Instead of eliciting self-pity, it stands in absolute defiance of everything that I’ve grown to be, not only telling me to be better, but showing me how” (Starkey, “Never Alone Review”). About forty members of the Inupiat community supported the project in various ways throughout its making, and many more at key points. Making sure the game was grounded in Inupiat environmental conditions, experience, and ideas was a central concern of the indigenous collaborators, including the kids who helped by playing early versions. The npr interview described the kids who were very engaged in deciding which animal—fox? owl? wolf?—should be the human girl Nuna’s companion character. Never Alone tells a story about an endless storm that threatens the people. Contemporary arctic peoples have well-developed accounts of climate alterations and of the changes in their environments, but the relevant idiom is not the Anthropocene. For example, see the website for the isuma film, Inuit Knowledge and Climate Change, which states, “Nunavut-based director Zacharias Kunuk (Atanarjuat The Fast Runner) and researcher and filmmaker Dr. Ian Mauro (Seeds of Change) have teamed up with Inuit communities to document their knowledge and experience regarding climate change. This new documentary, the world’s first Inuktitut language film on the topic, takes the viewer ‘on the land’ with elders and hunters to explore the social and ecological impacts of a warming Arctic. This unforgettable film helps us to appreciate Inuit culture and expertise regarding environmental change and indigenous ways of adapting to it.” N o t e s t o C h a p t e r See Callison, How Climate Change Comes to Matter, for fieldwork exploring the vernaculars in which one group of Alaskan Inuit address climate change. Situated in complex histories and politics, there are many formats besides computer games to consider when thinking about indigenous digital cultures. There are also computer games designed with indigenous cultural material, but not like Never Alone. See Ginsberg, “Rethinking the Digital Age”; Ginsberg, Abu-Lughod, and Larkin, Media Worlds; Lewis, Navajo Talking Picture. The notion of “Sila” is explained in a “Cultural Insight” that has to be earned by players of Never Alone. I always die before I get that far in the game, but it is possible to cheat on YouTube. See “Never Alone Cultural Insights—Sila Has a Soul,” in which Fannie Kuutuuq and others discuss Sila. A pan-Inuit term, Sila means something like “the weather” to Anglophone southerners, but only if the weather means the sky and the air, breath-soul, the element that enfolds the world and invests beings with life, as well as the environment from the earth to the moon, with its dynamic changes and powers. See Merker, “Breath Soul and Wind Owner.” The concept of climate change will not engulf Sila, nor vice versa; but these ideas/ work objects have met each other. There will be consequences for what counts as agencies, temporalities, and response-abilities. It matters what thoughts think thoughts, what stories tell stories, what knowledges know knowledges. I am in agreement with William Elliott on these cautions and with his engagements with native stories and thinkers, including new approaches to located animisms. He generously shared two manuscripts with me: Elliott, “Ravens’ World: Environmental Elegy and Beyond in a Changing North,” and Elliott, “Never Alone: Alaska Native Storytelling, Digital Media, and Premodern Posthumanisms.” In an npr interview, speaking of the collaboration with E-Line Media, Cook Inlet Tribal Council member Amy Fredeen noted, “I know this may come across a little strong, but when we talked about creating the first indigenous video game company, we wanted to set the bar high. And we wanted to own this space around telling traditional cultural stories through video games” (Demby, “Updating Centuries-Old Folktales”). Fredeen is clear that sharing indigenous stories outside the usual terms of colonizing appropriation depends on owning the stories and the storytelling apparatus. Quotation from Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna) website. Takahashi, “After Never Alone, E-Line Media and Alaska Native Group See Big Opportunity in ‘World Games.’” Takahashi continues: “[The game] got more than reviews in a wide array of publications (including GamesBeat), and it has been discussed around the world. It was on more than fifty ‘best of ’ awards. YouTube and Twitch player videos have drawn millions of views.” Thanks to Marco Harding for the reference and for teaching me how to play the game. Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, personal communication, October , . That is one of the reasons that “belief” has nothing to do with the practices of the sciences. Sciences are sensible practices, in all their material semiotic workings, including mathematics and physics. Isabelle Stengers has been relentlessly cogent on this point; her love for Galileo’s inclined planes depends on understanding Notes to Chapter that science is sensible. Asking if one “believes” in evolution or climate change is a Christian question, in both religious and secular formats, for which only a confessional reply is accepted. In such worlds, Science and Religion reign, and there it is impossible to play Never Alone. Harding, “Secular Trouble,” is my guide to the history of the category of belief, especially in Protestant colonizing cultures. See Harvey, The Handbook of Contemporary Animism. “Dzit Yíjiin bikáa’gi iiná náánásdláadóó ha’níigo biniiyé da’jitt’ó,” translated by Mae Washington. See Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land, “Black Mesa Weavers and Wool.” Continuous weaving is a material-semiotic practice in my idiom. The Black Mesa Water Coalition posts pictures of wonderful contemporary blankets for sale and of the weavers, including children learning the skill, as well as pictures of blankets in process, on its Facebook page. Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land commissioned three limited editions of Black Mesa Blankets. A sympoietic work, these blankets were designed by Diné shepherds and weavers, spun from Navajo-Churro fleece, produced in collaboration with the Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land, the San Jose Museum of Quilts and Textiles, the Christensen Fund, and the Pendleton Woolen Mills. For a picture of the Black Mesa Blanket, see San Jose Museum of Quilts and Textiles, “Black Mesa Blanket.” A late nineteenth-century giant in wool blankets targeting the Indian trade, Pendleton Woolen Mills played a large role in the history of harsh conditions for Navajo weaving. The “major blanket manufacturers usurped the Native American market and also appropriated a large portion of the Anglo market” (M’Closkey, Swept under the Rug, ). Today, Pendleton’s American Indian College Fund blankets provide scholarships for indigenous students, and Navajo families often treasure their own Pendleton blankets as well as Navajo weaving. “Thinker/maker” is a way of designating those engaged in the inextricable thinking/ making practices called art that I learned from Loveless, “Acts of Pedagogy.” Willink and Zolbrod, Weaving a World, . This volume is based on extensive discussions in the s of weavings and weaving with more than sixty elders from the eastern part of the Navajo Nation in and around Crownpoint, New Mexico. The beginnings of the Crownpoint Navajo Rug Auction in and the founding of the Crownpoint Rug Weavers Association, composed of Navajo weavers throughout the Southwest, mark critical junctions in strengthening weavers’ well-being and control of their markets, designs, and stories. Buyers from all over the world purchase directly from the weavers, who run the auction. See “Crownpoint Navajo Rug Auction” and Iverson, Diné, . However, most weavers still get much too little for the work, much less everything else that goes into making a blanket. The Crownpoint Auction experienced lethal financial problems in and reorganized as the new Crownpoint Rug Auction. By Willink and Zolbrod had worked together for more than twenty-five years. A member of the faculty at the University of New Mexico, Roseann Willink is a member of the Mexican Clan and was born for the Towering House Clan. N o t e s t o C h a p t e r Arguing that Navajo poetics and stories are intimately enfolded into the conduct of daily life, tying together relations among persons of the community with the cosmos, Paul Zolbrod published Diné bahane’: The Navajo Creation Story, the most complete version in English. See Denetdale, Reclaiming Diné History, –. For Navajo artisans’ stories of economic and cultural survival through the art of weaving, see the film written and directed by Bennie Klain, Weaving Worlds. M’Closkey, Swept under the Rug, –, –, argues persuasively for Navajo weaving as cosmological performance. She draws from her own work with weavers, as well as from previous scholarship, especially Witherspoon and Peterson, Dynamic Symmetry and Holistic Asymmetry, as well as Willink and Zolbrod, Weaving a World. Because of the long history of Navajo weavers selling their blankets under highly unequal terms to traders, as well as working with patterns, fibers, and dyes dictated by the art and tourist markets, most scholars and museologists have treated Navajo weaving as a commodity or an art product, but not as indigenous cosmological performance essential to maintaining hózhó. Among other things, that has meant no legal copyright protection for Navajo patterns and reproduction of cheap knock-offs in places like Oaxaca and Pakistan under all-too-imaginable conditions of labor. See M’Closkey and Halberstadt, “The Fleecing of Navajo Weavers.” Both the number and quality of contemporary Navajo weavings are extraordinary; and contemporary weavers have to compete in a market crowded both by copies produced abroad and by older exquisite and authentic Navajo blankets, which were sold from the late nineteenth century until the s by the pound at reservation trading posts to get credit to buy necessities. These heritage blankets sometimes sell for hundreds of thousands of dollars today in an art market that returns none of that money to the families of the original weavers, while blankets of similar or better quality, using both old and new designs, sell at auction to individual buyers as well as to craft market buyers at better prices than in the past, but still at rates that cannot sustain most of the weavers and their families. See M’Closkey, Swept under the Rug, for detailed analysis of the exploitation of Navajo weavers and weavings. Much of M’Closkey’s information comes from archives of the Hubbell Trading Post, which became a National Historic Site in . See Hubbell Trading Post, “History and Culture.” Chapter , “Playing String Figures with Companion Species,” argued that Navajo na’atl’o’, string figure games, are tied to the creation stories and performances of Spider Woman and the Holy Twins. Na’atl’o’ is also called “continuous weaving.” See Begay, “Shi’Sha’Hane (My Story),” –. For an exhibit of the innovative fourth-generation weaver D. Y. Begay’s tapestries at uc Davis’s Gorman Museum in , see Dave Jones, “Navajo Tapestries Capture the Soul of Her Land.” See also the “Weaving in Beauty” website and Monument Valley High School, “Ndahoo’aah Relearning/New Learning Navajo Crafts/Computer Design.” Ndahoo’aah is a summer program in design, computer programming, mathematics, and traditional Navajo crafts held every summer at Monument Valley High School. The website states, “Ndahoo’aah teaches some of the Navajo crafts that are still practiced on Notes to Chapter the Reservation . . . At the same time, Ndahoo’aah teaches logo graphics programming, focusing on mathematics (especially geometry). Graphics tools are then used to produce traditional designs and colorations.” For stories by weavers and other thinkers/makers, click on the “Stories” button of the Ndahoo’aah website. See also Eglash, “Native American Cybernetics.” Learning with young people from Black Mesa as well as the Diné College, and with weavers who helped the visitors understand their algorithms, Eglash and his coworkers link the robustness of such knowledge worlds to what he and his collaborators call “generative justice.” The point of such an approach is not mixing Indigenous and Western knowledge practices and stirring, but rather exploring the fraught possibility of generative contact zones without denying long histories of violence. E-mail from Ron Eglash to Donna Haraway, March , . “Inherent in the beauty of rug weaving is the artistic achievement reflecting every weaver’s frame of mind, creating designs of continual mathematical movement and regeneration of symbolism acknowledged for the Diné” (Clinton, “The Corn Pollen Path of Diné Rug Weaving”). In her book-in-progress, “Attaching, for Climate Change: A Sympoiesis of Media,” Katie King proposes khipu, Inca knotted strings, as a model for, but also a performance of, complex systems, media, and geo-change as “transcontextual transdisciplinary tangles.” King writes, “Fiber arts and ethnomathematics are necessarily transdisciplinary resources for the kind of scholarship being continually re-created [in khipu worlds] in a zone of unusual cultural continuity even after conquest. The Andes are a multitemporal geo-political zone for caring for object/ecology” (draft book proposal, ). See King, “In Knots.” Coral reefs, forests in Madagascar, the Inuit Arctic, and the Navajo-Hopi Black Mesa are also “multi-temporal geo-political zones for caring for object/ecology even after conquest” (King, draft proposal, ). In particular, continuous weaving, cosmological performance, world games, and “writing without words” in khipu, Never Alone, Navajo weaving, and the Crochet Coral Reef form complex string figures of thinking/making/acting. Again in King’s borrowings, these are “reciprocities made visible.” Boone and Mignolo, Writing without Words. For “reciprocities made visible,” see Salomon, The Cord Keepers, . Thanks to Katie King for these references. When I was researching Spanish rough sheep (Churro sheep) in the U.S. desert Southwest, I stumbled onto one of my favorite indigenous media projects—a Shoshoni Claymation video. The Gosiute of eastern Nevada and western Utah are Shoshone peoples. Like all peoples of the U.S. Southwest, the Gosiute are embroiled in the ecologies, economies, and politics of nuclear mining, war, waste processing, and storage. Their relatives have lived in these deserts for more than a thousand years; and, living and dead, they are indigenous to the ongoing Chthulucene, tangled in the grip of the colonial and imperial Anthropocene and Capitalocene. A sort of audio collage, the sound track for the Claymation video Frog Races Coyote/Itsappeh wa’ai Wako was constructed from the archives of several Shoshone-language storytellers by the Gosiute/Shoshoni Project of the University N o t e s t o C h a p t e r of Utah. Frogs think-with frogs; frog wins the race against coyote around the lake. Collective action can defeat the wiliest opponent. The Frog and Coyote story is taught today in the Utah Indian Curriculum Guide, “The Goshutes.” Listening to and learning a Shoshoni language today in public schools and on the Internet is part of indigenous America not disappearing, but traveling in tongues to unexpected places to reopen questions for ongoingness, accountability, and lived storying. On the importance of fostering actual indigenous language use, in all its “emergent vitalities,” among the young who are no longer fluent native speakers, see Perley, “Zombie Linguistics.” See Denetdale, Reclaiming Diné History, –; Johnson, Navajo Stories of the Long Walk Period; Morrison, Paradise. The twentieth-century Navajo-Hopi reservation land partition laws and forced removal of thousands of Navajo from Black Mesa/ Big Mountain/Dzil ni Staa to make way for industrial coal mining are sometimes called the second great Hwéeldi. Beginning in , Pauline Whitesinger, her clan allies, and other Diné elders started a resistance that has not ceased. “By , Big Mountain Dineh resisters and their few but growing non-Native allies began network strategies that reached as far as Washington State, Southern California, and the east coast. Non-Native support collectives began bringing themselves and logistics out to the now restricted zones. Both the indigenous community and non-Natives shared the need to document the deliberate violations of human rights, to stop forcible occupation to extract fossil fuel, to halt the desecration of human religions, and to let the world know that the U.S. is committing genocide” (NaBahe [Bahe] Keediniihii [Katenay],“The Big Mountain Dineh Resistance”). Efforts to relocate sheep-herding Navajo and their animals intensified again in , with strong bia and tribal police efforts to break the bond between Diné and non-Native allies. See the Black Mesa Indigenous Support website. Black Mesa Indigenous Support runs Big Mountain spring training camps for activists. I owe “originally trauma” to Kami Chisholm. For a rich argument about Native Americans making kin with each other and with plants and animals—processes disrupted by forced commodity relations and Christian kinship systems—see Kim TallBear, “Failed Settler Kinship, Truth and Reconciliation, and Science.” TallBear drew from Dakota histories for this blog post. TallBear is a leader in thinking about the “making of love and relations beyond settler sexualities.” Several sources inform my sketch of the near extermination of Navajo-Churro sheep in the s, but especially the thoroughly researched book by Weisiger, Dreaming of Sheep in Navajo Country. See also Weisiger, “Gendered Injustice”; the website of the Navajo Sheep Project; White, The Roots of Dependency; Johnson and Roessel, Navajo Livestock Reduction; and McPherson, “Navajo Livestock Reduction in Southeastern Utah, –.” In A Plague of Sheep, Melville argues that Spanish sheep were devastatingly effective colonizers, creatures of empire, which forever altered the ecology and native society of highland central Mexico in favor of the conquerors. The same could be said of sheep in the U.S. Southwest. True enough, Notes to Chapter but origins are not closed destinies; and sheep and indigenous and allied peoples of these lands have forged remarkably durable multispecies ways of living and dying with each other on the Colorado Plateau, in complex resistance to ongoing colonial practices. Horoshko, “Rare Breed,” and Navajo Sheep Project, “History.” See Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land, “Diné Navajo Weavers and Wool,” and Halberstadt, “Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land.” Diné be’iína/The Navajo Lifeway, “Dibé be’iína/Sheep Is Life.” Strawn and Littrel, “Returning Navajo-Churro Sheep for Weaving.” For a story about Roy Kady, one of the Navajo Nation’s best-known male weavers, who has dedicated his life to the well-being of Navajo-Churro sheep, see Kiefel, “Heifer Helps Navajos Bolster Sheep Herd.” Blystone and Chanler, A Gift from Talking God, is a moving dvd produced in , narrated by Jack Loeffler, featuring Roy Kady, Jay Begay, Lyle McNeal, and Gary Paul Nabhan. See also Kraker, “The Real Sheep,” and Cannon, “Sacred Sheep Revive Navajo Tradition, for Now.” . “Behavioural studies in our laboratory using choice mazes and operant discrimination tasks have revealed quite remarkable face-recognition abilities in sheep, similar to those found in humans . . . These experiments showed that sheep could discriminate between sheep and human faces, between different breeds of sheep and between sexes in the same breed” (Tate et al., “Behavioural and Neurophysiological Evidence for Face Identity and Face Emotion Processing in Animals,” ). Says cofounder Peter Hagerty, a sheep and horse farmer who bought wool in from the Soviet Union to somehow unknot the Cold War, “I used to describe Peace Fleece as an international yarn company doing business with historic enemies like Palestinians and Israelis and Russians and Americans. Today that description still holds true but recently I have grown to see it more as a place where very normal people come together on a regular basis to help each other get through the day” (Peace Fleece, “The Story”). See Peace Fleece, “Irene Bennalley.” On Irene Bennalley, see Benanav, “The Sheep Are Like Our Parents.” Black Mesa Water Coalition, “About.” On the founding and goals of bmwc, see Paget-Clarke, “An Interview with Wahleah Johns and Lilian Hill.” Johns is Diné from Forest Lake, a community on Black Mesa (Johns, website). Working out of the San Francisco Bay Area beginning in , Johns was the Solar Project Coordinator of the bmwc. Hill is from Kykotsmovi, Tobacco clan. Living in Kykotsmovi, she is a Certified Permaculture Designer and Natural Builder (Hill, “Hopi Tutskwa Permaculture”). bmwc activists were active at cop in Paris in in the Peoples Climate Justice Summit/Indigenous Rising. Executive Directior of bmwc Jihan Gearon testified on September , , at the Peoples Tribunal. For an audio recording, go to Gearon, Peoples Tribunal. Haraway and Tsing, “Tunneling in the Chthulucene.” For thinking with another people of the Southwest, see Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places. bmwc, “Our Work”; Communities United for a Just Transition, “Our Power Convening.” See bmwc, “th Anniversary Video,” narrated by Executive Director Jihan Gearon. For a video of codirectors of bmwc in , see Johns and Begay, N o t e s t o C h a p t e r Speech at Power Shift ’. See also bmwc, “Green Economy Project.” For a powerful reflection in on how to continue working together across time and difference, see Gearon, “Strategies for Healing Our Movements.” Tódích’ií’nii (Bitter Water) clan and African American, Gearon earned a bs from Stanford in earth systems, focusing on energy science and technology. See Afro-Native Narratives, “Jihan Gearon, Indigenous People’s Rights Advocate.” In her generation, the urgent conversation between needed concepts and practices is more possible—politically, culturally, spiritually, scientifically. Gearon made Grist magazine’s “Grist : The People You’ll Be Talking About in ,” https://grist.org/grist-/profile/jihan -gearon/, accessed March , . Giovanna Di Chiro, professor of environmental studies at Swarthmore College, has for many years been my guide to bringing together the feminist movement, multiethnic and antiracist environmental justice, critters of the seas and inland waters, urban antitoxic coalitions, and action research. We are also linked by research on symbiosis and evolutionary relationships. String figures linking women—and men—through friendship, mentoring, and research projects in all these worlds have shaped the pattern. See DiChiro, “Cosmopolitics of a Seaweed Sisterhood,” “A New Spelling of Sustainability,” “Acting Globally,” and “Beyond Ecoliberal ‘Common Futures.’” Part of a sympoietic seaweed sisterhood that shaped her life, in Giovanna was an undergraduate at uc Santa Cruz working with phycologist Linda Goff. Giovanna was a collector for the team at the Oahu, Hawaii, coral reef research site off Coconut Island that characterized Prochloron didemni, the cyanobacterial symbiont living in the gut of its ascidian partner. The molecular and ultrastructural analysis provided evidence of an evolutionary relationship between Prochloron and eukaryotic chloroplasts of green plants. See Giddings, Withers, and Staehlin, “Supramolecular Structure of Stacked and Unstacked Regions of the Photosynthetic Membranes of Prochloron.” A few years before, teaching biology and the history of science at the University of Hawaii on Oahu, I had written chapters of my PhD thesis on organismic metaphors that shape embryos in developmental biology while living on Coconut Island in a commune that included Michael Hadfield, an important marine developmental and ecological biologist in the current flowering of EcoEvoDevo, discussed in the first part of this chapter. See Haraway, Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields. I was Giovanna’s PhD adviser in History of Consciousness at ucsc; her degree was awarded in . Cat’s cradle, indeed. Stengers, Cosmopolitics I and Cosmopolitics II; Stengers, “The Cosmopolitical Proposal.” Chapter : Making Kin Intra-action is a concept given us by Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway. I keep using interaction too in order to remain legible to audiences who do not yet understand the radical change Barad’s analysis demands, but probably out of my linguistically promiscuous habits, as well. Tsing, “Feral Biologies.” Notes to Chapter Moore, Capitalism in the Web of Life. I owe Scott Gilbert for pointing out, during the Ethnos conversation and other interactions at Aarhus University in October , that the Anthropocene (and Plantationocene) should be considered a boundary event like the K-Pg boundary, not an epoch. In a recorded conversation for Ethnos at the University of Aarhus in October , the participants collectively generated the name Plantationocene for the devastating transformation of diverse kinds of human-tended farms, pastures, and forests into extractive and enclosed plantations, relying on slave labor and other forms of exploited, alienated, and usually spatially transported labor. See Tsing et al., “Anthropologists Are Talking about the Anthropocene.” See aura, website. Scholars have long understood that the slave plantation system was the model and motor for the carbon-greedy machine-based factory system that is often cited as an inflection point for the Anthropocene. Nurtured in even the harshest circumstances, slave gardens not only provided crucial human food, but also refuges for biodiverse plants, animals, fungi, and soils. Slave gardens are an underexplored world, especially compared to imperial botanical gardens, for the travels and propagations of myriad critters. Moving material semiotic generativity around the world for capital accumulation and profit—the rapid displacement and reformulation of germ plasm, genomes, cuttings, and all other names and forms of part organisms and of deracinated plants, animals, and people—is one defining operation of the Plantationocene, Capitalocene, and Anthropocene taken together. The Plantationocene continues with ever greater ferocity in globalized factory meat production, monocrop agribusiness, and immense substitutions of crops like oil palm for multispecies forests and their products that sustain human and nonhuman critters alike. The participants in the Ethnos conversation included Noboru Ishikawa, Anthropology, Center for South East Asian Studies, Kyoto University; Anna Tsing, Anthropology, University of California at Santa Cruz; Donna Haraway, History of Consciousness, University of California at Santa Cruz; Scott F. Gilbert, Biology, Swarthmore; Nils Bubandt, Department of Culture and Society, Aarhus University; and Kenneth Olwig, Landscape Architecture, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences. Gilbert adopted the term Plantationocene for key arguments in the coda to the second edition of his widely used textbook, Gilbert and Epel, Ecological Developmental Biology. According to personal e-mail communications from both Jason Moore and Alf Hornborg in late , Malm proposed the term Capitalocene in a seminar in Lund, Sweden, in , when he was still a graduate student. I first used the term independently in public lectures starting in . Moore edited a book titled Anthropocene or Capitalocene? (pm Press, ), which has essays by Moore, myself, and others. Our collaborative webs thicken. The suffix -cene proliferates! I risk this overabundance because I am in the thrall of the root meanings of -cene/kainos, namely, the temporality of the thick, fibrous, and lumpy “now,” which is ancient and not. Os Mil Nomes de Gaia/The Thousand Names of Gaia was the generative international conference organized by Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, Déborah Danowski, N o t e s t o C h a p t e r and their collaborators in September in Rio de Janeiro. See The Thousand Names of Gaia, “Videos,” and Haraway, “Entrevista.” Clifford, Returns, , , , . Van Dooren, Flight Ways; Despret, “Ceux qui insistent.” For a wealth of Despret’s important essays translated into English, see Buchanan, Bussolini, and Chrulew, “Philosophical Ethology II: Vinciane Despret.” Card, Speaker for the Dead. Making kin must be done with respect for historically situated, diverse kinships that should not be either generalized or appropriated in the interest of a tooquick common humanity, multispecies collective, or similar category. Kinships exclude as well as include, and they should do that. Alliances must be attentive to that matter. The sorry spectacle of many white liberals in the U.S., in the wake of African American and allied organizing against police murders of Black people and other outrages, resisting #BlackLivesMatter by insisting that #AllLivesMatter is instructive. Making alliances requires recognizing specificities, priorities, and urgencies. Alicia Garza, who created #Black Lives Matter with Patrisse Cullors and Opal Tometi as a call to action, wrote a powerful history of the hashtag and subsequent movement and efforts to delegitimize it with a false universal kinship rather than accountable alliances in the celebration and humanization of Black lives. See Garza, “A Herstory of the #BlackLivesMatter Movement.” As she argues, when Black people get free, everybody gets free, but that requires central focus on Black lives because their ongoing degradation is fundamental to U.S. society. Similar issues attach to the core relation of BlackLivesMatter and environmental justice, a topic explored in a series of astute posts on Grist by the justice editor, Brentin Mock, https://grist.org/author/brentin-mock/, accessed March , . On many levels, making kin is not separate from these topics. Similar questions also apply to the too-easy term reconciliation, which is used as a nationand kin-making term. Intending to make kin while not seeing both past and ongoing colonial and other policies for extermination and/or assimilation augurs for very dysfunctional “families,” to say the least. Kim TallBear and Erica Lee are doing fundamental work in this area, within a generative explosion of feminist indigenous public thinking, acting, and scholarship. Here is where common worlds—cosmopolitics—to go on with might have a chance to be constructed. See TallBear, “Failed Settler Kinship, Truth and Reconciliation, and Science,” and Lee, “Reconciling in the Apocalypse.” I am informed by TallBear’s critique of settler sexualities and arguments for both inherited and yet-to-be-invented practices of kinship, infused with situated, historically attentive, ongoing, and experimental indigenous worldings. Listen to TallBear, “Making Love and Relations Beyond Settler Sexualities.” IdleNoMore, like BlackLivesMatter, taps the roots of any possible multicritter multipeople mycorrhizal “holoent” on a damaged planet. Strathern, The Gender of the Gift. Latour, “Facing Gaïa.” Robinson, . This extraordinary sf narrative won the Nebula Award for best novel. Notes to Chapter Strathern, “Shifting Relations.” Making kin is a surging popular practice, and new names are also proliferating. See Skurnick, That Should Be a Word, for kinnovator, a person who makes family in nonconventional ways, to which I add kinnovation. Skurnick also proposes clanarchist. These are not just words; they are clues and prods to earthquakes in kin making that is not limited to Western family apparatuses, heteronormative or not. I think babies should be rare, nurtured, and precious; and kin should be abundant, unexpected, enduring, and precious. Gens is another word, patriarchal by origin, with which feminists are playing. Origins and ends do not determine each other. Kin and gens are littermates in the history of Indo-European languages. In hopeful intra-actional communist moments, see Bear et al., “Gens.” The writing is perhaps too dry (although the summary bullet points help), and there are no juicy examples to make this Manifesto seduce the spoiled reader; but the references give huge resources to do all that, most the fruit of long-term, intimately engaged, deeply theorized ethnographies. See especially Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World. The precision of the methodological approach in “Gens” is in its address to those would-be Marxists or other theorists who resist feminism, and who therefore don’t engage the heterogeneity of real life worlds but stay with categories like Markets, the Economy, and Financialization (or, I would add, Reproduction, Production, and Population—in short, the supposedly adequate categories of standard liberal and nonfeminist socialist political economy). Go, Honolulu’s Revolution Books and all your kin! My experience is that those I hold dear as “our people,” on the Left or whatever name we can still use without apoplexy, hear neo-imperialism, neoliberalism, misogyny, and racism (who can blame them?) in the “Not Babies” part of “Make Kin Not Babies.” We imagine that the “Make Kin” part is easier and ethically and politically on firmer ground. Not true! “Make Kin” and “Not Babies” are both hard; they both demand our best emotional, intellectual, artistic, and political creativity, individually and collectively, across ideological and regional differences, among other differences. My sense is that “our people” can be partially compared to some Christian climate-change deniers: beliefs and commitments are too deep to allow rethinking and refeeling. For our people to revisit what has been owned by the Right and by development professionals as the “population explosion” can feel like going over to the dark side. But denial will not serve us. I know “population” is a state-making category, the sort of “abstraction” and “discourse” that remake reality for everybody, but not for everybody’s benefit. I also think that evidence of many kinds, epistemologically and affectively comparable to the varied evidence for rapid anthropogenic climate change, shows that – billion human beings make demands that cannot be borne without immense damage to human and nonhuman beings across the earth. This is not a simple causal affair; ecojustice has no allowable one-variable approach to the cascading exterminations, immiserations, and extinctions on today’s earth. But blaming Capitalism, Imperialism, Neoliberalism, Modernization, or some other “not us” for ongoing destruction webbed with human numbers will not work either. These issues demand difficult, unrelenting work; but they also N o t e s t o C h a p t e r demand joy, play, and response-ability to engage with unexpected others. All parts of these issues are much too important for Terra to hand them over to the Right or to development professionals or to anybody else in the business-as-usual camps. Here’s to Oddkin—non-natalist and off-category! We must find ways to celebrate low birth rates and personal, intimate decisions to make flourishing and generous lives (including innovating enduring kin— kinnovating) without making more babies—urgently and especially, but not only, in wealthy high-consumption and misery-exporting regions, nations, communities, families, and social classes. We need to encourage population and other policies that engage scary demographic issues by proliferating other-than-natal kin—including nonracist immigration, environmental and social support policies for new comers and “native-born” alike (education, housing, health, gender and sexual creativity, agriculture, pedagogies for nurturing other-than-human critters, technologies and social innovations to keep older people healthy and productive, etc., etc.). The inalienable personal “right” (what a word for such a mindful bodily matter!) to birth or not to birth a new baby is not in question for me; coercion is wrong at every imaginable level in this matter, and it tends to backfire in any case, even if one can stomach coercive law or custom (I cannot). On the other hand, what if the new normal were to become a cultural expectation that every new child have at least three lifetime committed parents (who are not necessarily each other’s lovers and who would birth no more new babies after that, although they might live in multichild, multigenerational households)? What if serious adoption practices for and by the elderly became common? What if nations that are worried about low birth rates (Denmark, Germany, Japan, Russia, Singapore, Taiwan, white America, more) acknowledged that fear of immigrants is a big problem and that racial purity projects and fantasies drive resurgent pronatalism? What if people everywhere looked for non-natalist kinnovations to individuals and collectives in queer, decolonial, and indigenous worlds, instead of to European, Euro-American, Chinese, or Indian rich and wealth-extracting sectors? As a reminder that racial purity fantasies and refusal to accept immigrants as full citizens actually drive policy now in the “progressive” “developed” world, see Hakim, “Sex Education in Europe Turns to Urging More Births.” In response to this piece, science writer Rusten Hogness posted on his Facebook page on April , , “What is wrong with our imaginations and with our ability to look out for one another (human and non-human alike) if we can’t find ways to address issues raised by changing age distributions without making ever more human babies? We need to find ways to celebrate young folks who decide not to have kids, not add nationalism to the already potent mix of pro-natalist pressures on them”(https:// www.facebook.com/rusten.hogness?fref=ts, accessed March , ). Pronatalism in all its powerful guises ought to be in question almost everywhere. I keep “almost” as a reminder about the consequences of genocide and displacement for peoples—an ongoing scandal. The “almost” is also a prod to remember contemporary sterilization abuse, shockingly inappropriate and unusable Notes to Chapter means of contraception, reduction of women and men to ciphers in old and new population control policies, and other misogynist, patriarchal, and ethnicist/racist practices built into business as usual around the world. For example, see Wilson, “The ‘New’ Global Population Control Policies.” For an indispensable critical analysis of geopolitics and global intellectual history of population control discourse, see Bashford, Global Population. For a focused critical study of the oppressive social life of numbers in Guatemala, see Nelson, Who Counts? Such studies show why reemphasizing the burden of growing human numbers, especially as a global demographic abstraction, can be so dangerous. Thanks to Michelle Murphy for the references and the resistance to my arguments, no matter how well intended. I still think they are necessary. See Murphy, “Thinking against Population and with Distributed Futures.” We need each others’ risk-taking support, in conflict and collaboration, big time on all these matters. Chapter : Awash in Urine Cyborgs might be considered to be “holoents” in the sense developed in chapter . “Diethylstilbesterol,” Wikipedia. This Wikipedia article is a first stop with a useful bibliography, but is worse than worthless for tracking feminist and women’s health activist connections to des. See Bell, des Daughters, Embodied Knowledge, and the Transformation of Women’s Health Politics in the Late Twentieth Century. Barbara Seaman, who died in , is one of my heroes in this story; her work was crucial to persuading the U.S. federal government to convene a task force on des. In , she cofounded the National Women’s Health Network. For a bit of the history and tributes to Seaman, see Editors, “A Tribute to Barbara Seaman,” and Seaman, “Health Activism, American Feminist.” Jewish women have been central in the history of feminist women’s health activism. Another hero who recently died, Pat Cody, also worked effectively to change a personal tragedy caused by des into a global feminist health movement. See Rosen, “Pat Cody.” For innovative and standard-setting feminist science studies, see Oodshourn, Beyond the Natural Body. First-generation users of des have increased incidence of and mortality rates from breast cancer. Second-generation offspring, “des daughters,” develop dangerous vaginal and breast cancers, as well as other problems like infertility and “abnormal pregnancy outcomes.” That means damaged or dead children. des is the only transplacental carcinogen known in our species. What a distinction! It is also a teratogen; see “abnormal pregnancy outcome.” des sons have nasty effects too. From Forney, “Diethylstilbesterol for Veterinary Use”: “The most-serious sideeffect of estrogen therapy [in dogs] is bone-marrow suppression and toxicity that may progress to a fatal aplastic-anemia . . . Side effects are more common in older animals.” See Brooks, “Diethylstilbesterol”: “As the uses of des dwindled to a few veterinary uses, its manufacturer found it unprofitable to continue production and des N o t e s t o C h a p t e r went off the market in the late s. Fortunately for the numerous incontinent female dogs hoping to lead indoor lives, the human carcinogenicity issues have not crossed over into the canine health arena. The low doses and infrequent dosing schedule has [sic] positioned des as a medication of unparalleled safety and convenience in the treatment of canine incontinence. Compounding pharmacies now make this medication readily available to patients who need it on a prescription basis.” An important player in companion animal consumer marketing, Foster and Smith, “Diethylstilbesterol,” tells us that prolonged use in pets can cause ovarian cancer. Raun and Preston, “History of Diethylstilbestrol Use in Cattle.” Popular sites on estrogens in and for women include “Estrogen,” Healthy Women. org, and “Estrogen,” Midlife-Passages.com. Premarin® is a mix of conjugated estrogens branded with a registered trademark. These equine estrogens are chemically different from those made in the human body; i.e., they are not bioidentical, but they are bioactive across species. Ethinyl estradiol is the artificial estrogen commonly found in contemporary birth control pills and, like des, is manufactured in the laboratory. Nomenclatures for hormones around terms like natural, synthetic, biomimetic, bioidentical, and artificial can be confusing, biologically and politically. For example, soy-derived estrogens often are called natural, but not because they are chemically identical to naturally occurring human estrogens. “Natural” is about branded biovalue in many contested senses. Cenestin is a conjugated estrogen marketed by Duramed Pharmaceuticals. Made from plant sources, Cenestin is called “natural,” but it is a conjugated mix that is chemically a copy of Premarin, so neither is bioidentical to human estrogens. Because it is derived from horses, Premarin gets called synthetic, although it is heavily processed but not synthesized in the laboratory. See Petras, “Making Sense of hrt.” Substituting a plant source for horse urine, Cenestin is a the kind of work-around that becomes cost effective when the biopolitical/bioethical cost of a technoscientific product gets too high in a particular naturalcultural ecology. Duramed calls its conjugated estrogens “synthetic” and an “advanced form of Premarin,” emphasizing that “Cenestin does not contain any hormone synthesized by the horse.” So Cenestin is at once natural, synthetic, mimetic, and advanced, while Premarin’s relation to horses forbids the label natural. Keeping corporate lawyers busy, the patenting fur has flown thickly over the naming rights for these drugs. Hormone Health Network, “Emminen.” The first hormonal treatment for symptoms of human menopause in the United States, in , was with a derivative of calf amniotic fluid. Emmenin, from Canadian pregnant women’s urine, was first marketed in the United States in . In des was marketed as a more potent estrogen than Emmenin. An obvious cyborg cocktail, the mix of historically situated organic and technological species, both human and not-human, could hardly be missed. Women’s Health Initiative, “Risks and Benefits of Estrogen Plus Progestin in Healthy Postmenopausal Women”; Vance, “Premarin.” See also Wilks, “The Comparative Potencies of Birth Control and Menopausal Hormone Drug Use.” Notes to Chapter North American Equine Ranching Information Council, “About the Equine Ranching Industry.” North American Equine Ranching Information Council, “Equine Veterinarians’ Consensus Report on the Care of Horses on pmu Ranches.” HorseAid, “What Are the Living Conditions of the Mares?” “Premarin Controversy,” Wikipedia; Horse Fund, “Fact Sheet”; HorseAid website; Hall, “The Bright Side of pmu.” HorseAid Report, “PREgnant MARes’ urINe, Curse or Cure?” Horse Fund, “Fact Sheet.” The horsefund.org fact sheet paints a very different picture than the naeric website. HorseAid has been more careful in its descriptions and dates than the International Fund for Horses, which continued to publish as if they were current, as late as , conditions originally described in the s and s, but also printed an interesting and damning timeline on Premarin and its checkered corporate and medical history on http://www.horsefund.org/premarin -timeline.php, online in November , but unavailable in August . For data on Premarin sales and pmu farm numbers from to , see Allin, “Wyeth Wins, Horses Lose.” In Allin was a research analyst with the International Fund for Horses. Pfizer will increase pmu collection in –. Working in Manitoba for about nine years, Equine Angels Rescue Sanctuary narrated a story from October about helping pmu farmers get out of the breeding business. The plan attended to the needs of farmers, foals, mares, and stallions. The note on the website on February , , updated progress on the project. See Weller, Equine Angels. There were several other pmu horse rescue sites active in . The last time I checked the unfinished story was August , ; see Equine Advocates, “pmu Industry.” Reflecting the sharp decline in farm numbers since , rescue operations now attend more to out-of-work pmu horses than to overproduced foals, but pregnant mare’s urine is still produced and still used in Premarin-containing products. Chapter : Sowing Worlds In everything I write about companion species, I am instructed by Anna Tsing’s “Unruly Edges: Mushrooms as Companion Species.” Without the deceptive comforts of human exceptionalism, Tsing succeeds both in telling world history from the point of view of fungal associates and also in rewriting Engels’s The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State. Tsing’s is a tale of speculative fabulation, an sf genre crucial to feminist theory. She and I are in a relation of reciprocal induction, that fundamental evolutionary ecological developmental worlding process that is basic to all becoming-with. See Gilbert and Epel, Ecological Developmental Biology. Rose, Reports from a Wild Country, taught me that recuperation, not reconciliation or restoration, is what is needed and maybe just possible. I find many of the words that begin with reuseful, including resurgence and resilience. Postis more of a problem. N o t e s t o C h a p t e r For Le Guin, see especially The Word for World Is Forest and “‘The Author of Acacia Seeds’ and Other Extracts from the Journal of the Association of Therolinguistics.” “The Author of Acacia Seeds” was first published in in Fellowship of the Stars. For Butler, see especially Parable of the Sower and Parable of the Talents. Butler inspired a new generation of “stories from social justice movements.” See Brown and Imarisha, Octavia’s Brood. Le Guin’s work also pervades much writing for environmental justice and environmental resurgence. Le Guin, “The Carrier Bag Theory,” shaped my thinking about narrative in evolutionary theory and of the figure of woman the gatherer for Primate Visions. Le Guin learned about the Carrier Bag Theory of Evolution from Fisher, Women’s Creation, in that period of large, brave, speculative, worldly stories that burned in feminist theory in the s and s. Like speculative fabulation, speculative feminism was, and is, an sf practice. Le Guin, “The Carrier Bag Theory,” . Le Guin, “The Carrier Bag Theory,” . Le Guin, “The Carrier Bag Theory,” . My guide with and through sf, my “mystra,” here is LaBare, “Farfetchings.” (LaBare’s term mystra begins to accrue meanings on p. .) LaBare argues that sf is not fundamentally a genre, even in the extended sense that includes film, comics, and much else besides the printed book or magazine. The sf mode is, rather, a mode of attention, a theory of history, and a practice of worlding. He writes, “What I call the ‘sf mode’ offers one way of focusing that attention, of imagining and designing alternatives to the world that is, alas, the case” (). LaBare suggests that the sf mode pays attention to the “conceivable, possible, inexorable, plausible, and logical” (italics in original, ). One of his principal mystras is Le Guin, especially in the lure of her understanding of “talking backwards” in the postapocalyptic Northern Californian sf novel Always Coming Home. Reading Parable of the Sower together with Always Coming Home is a good way for coastal travelers to fill the carrier bag for recuperative terraforming before the apocalypse instead of just afterward. Instructed in this sf mode, perhaps human people and earth others can avert inexorable disaster and plant the conceivable germ of possibility for multispecies, multiplacetime recuperation before it is too late. Myrmex is the Greek word for ant, and one story has it that an Attic maiden named Myrmex annoyed Athena by claiming the invention of the plow as the maiden’s own and so was turned into an ant by the goddess. Me, judging from the tunnels ants dig all over the world and comparing that to Athena’s more sky-looking and heady credentials, I think Myrmex probably had the stronger claim to having authored the plow. Breaking out of daddy’s brain is really not the same as tunneling and runneling in the earth, whether one is goddess, woman, or ant. For actual ants, one could not do better than Deborah Gordon, Ants at Work; Ant Encounters; and “The Ecology of Collective Behavior.” For contrasting approaches to explanation, see Hölldobler and Wilson, The Superorganism, and Hölldobler and Wilson, The Ants. Based on her studies of developing behavior in harvester ant colonies in the Arizona desert and evidence that individual ants switch tasks over their lifetimes, Notes to Chapter Gordon has been a critic of E. O. Wilson’s emphasis on rigidly determined ant behavior. For me, Wilson is the heroic Athena to Gordon’s inventive Attic maid Myrmex with a seedbag and a digging tool. To get started with acacias, go to Wikipedia’s “Acacia” entry, and then to “Biology of Acacia,” a special issue of Australian Systematic Botany (). Lest one think all the world-building action is an ant story, check out Mann, “Termites Help Build Savannah Societies.” Le Guin, “‘The Author of Acacia Seeds,’” . Le Guin, “‘The Author of Acacia Seeds,’” . See, for example, Gilbert and Epel, Ecological Developmental Biology; Gilbert et al., “Symbiosis as a Source of Selectable Epigenetic Variation”; McFall-Ngai, “The Development of Cooperative Associations between Animals and Bacteria”; McFallNgai, “Unseen Forces”; and Hird, The Origins of Sociable Life. On symbiogenesis as the driver of evolutionary change, see Margulis and Sagan, Acquiring Genomes. See the website of the Global Invasive Species Database for information about troublesome Australian acacias in South America and South Africa. See also “Pacific Islands Ecosystems at Risk” for information about Acacia mearnisii (black wattle). Several acacia species, especially the coastal wattle Acacia cyclops, worry conservationists in California. All of these disputed travelers teach us to stay with the multispecies trouble that motivates most of my work and play these days. See Bonfante and Anca, “Plants, Mycorrhizal Fungi, and Bacteria.” This article draws our attention to the many-faceted practices of communication among members of multispecies consortia. As the abstract summarizes, “Release of active molecules, including volatiles, and physical contact among the partners seem important for the establishment of the bacteria/mycorrhizal fungus/plant network. The potential involvement of quorum sensing and Type III secretion systems is discussed, even if the exact nature of the complex interspecies/interphylum interactions remains unclear.” “Acacia,” Wikipedia; Heil et al., “Evolutionary Change from Induced to Constitutive Expression of an Indirect Plant Resistance.” Attenborough, “Intimate Relations”; A. Ross, “Devilish Ants Control the Garden.” My debts to Deborah Bird Rose are obvious here and throughout this essay. See especially her development of the idea of double death in “What If the Angel of History Were a Dog?” Double death signifies the killing of ongoingness and the blasting of generations. Rose teaches me about Aboriginal ways of crafting responsibility, inhabiting time, and the need for recuperation in her Reports from a Wild Country. See also the important open-access journal Environmental Humanities, now under the protection of Duke University Press. Le Guin, “‘The Author of Acacia Seeds,’” . N o t e s t o C h a p t e r Chapter : A Curious Practice Epigraph : Vinciane Despret, personal communication. Epigraph : Arendt, Lectures on Kant’s Political Philosophy, . Despret, “‘Sheep Do Have Opinions,’” . Despret, “Domesticating Practices,” . Despret, “Domesticating Practices,” . Despret, “Domesticating Practices,” . Despret, “The Becoming of Subjectivity in Animal Worlds,” . With courage and precision, Porcher has also studied horrific industrial pig facilities that can never be called farms. For her vision of what is possible, see Porcher, Vivre avec les animaux. Despret, “The Becoming of Subjectivity in Animal Worlds,” . Despret, “The Becoming of Subjectivity in Animal Worlds,” . Despret, “The Body We Care For.” Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss. Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss, . Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss, . Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss, . Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss, –. Quotations from draft sent to me in , no pagination; subsequently published as Despret, “Why ‘I Had Not Read Derrida.’” For example, see the film written and directed by Davaa and Falorni, The Story of the Weeping Camel. See Despret, Au bonheur des morts. Subsequently revised for chapter of Staying with the Trouble, the Cerisy paper was published in French as Haraway, “Jeux de ficelles avec les espèces compagnes.” See Crasset, “Capsule,” and figure ., p. . Despret, “Ceux qui insistent.” Chapter : Zoutini, Strivay, and Terranova, “Les enfants du compost, les enfants des monarques.” Inspired by the unruly litter of the children of compost, Terranova made a full length narrative film portrait, Donna Haraway: Story Telling for Earthly Survival. “Anthropocene: Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet,” Santa Cruz, CA, May –, . Videos of presentations from the conference are available on the website. Anna Tsing and colleagues organized this conference. See also Tsing et al., Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet. The “Make Kin Not Babies” and the “Children of Compost” projects will have a collective digital world for story posting and gaming. Fragments, polished stories, plot sketches, scientific speculations, drawings, plausible biological and technologNotes to Chapter ical mechanisms for the syms’ ongoing transformations, designs, images, animations, games, characters, pamphlets, manifestos, histories and critiques, bestiaries, field guides, blogposts, slogans: all are welcome. Sym fiction can change plots, introduce new characters and stories, play with media, argue, draw, speculate, more. Stay tuned for the websites and blogs to come. See also the website for Stories for Change, an “online meeting place for digital story telling facilitators and activists.” This slogan joins a litter of symbiogenetic and sympoietic provocations that lure my writing. In the s, Elizabeth Bird, then a graduate student in History of Consciousness, gave me “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival.” More recently, over breakfast at home Rusten Hogness gave me “Not Posthuman but Compost!” as well as humusities rather than humanities. Camille gives us “Make Kin Not Babies.” Breaking the “necessity” of the tie between kin and reproduction is a crucial task for feminists now. It is past time to make a fuss. Disloyal to patriarchal genealogy, we have helped disable the sense of natural necessity of the ties of race and nation, although that work is never done; and we have unraveled the bonds of sex and gender, although we are not finished there either. Feminists have been powerful players disabling the pretensions of human exceptionalism too. No wonder that there is much more collaborative work to do strengthening webs, cutting some ties and knotting others, to live and die well in a habitable world. Adele Clarke and I organized a panel at the Denver meetings in November of the Society for Social Studies of Science titled “Make Kin Not Babies,” arguing for innovative antiracist, prowomen, prochildren, proindigenous, nonsettler, non-natalist approaches. Besides Clarke and myself, panelists were Alondra Nelson, Michelle Murphy, Kim TallBear, and Chia-Ling Wu. Both inheriting and also reweaving ongoing webs of affective and material relationships are the stakes; such webs are necessary for staying with the trouble. In scholarly circles, ethnographers have understood best that making kin involves all sorts of categories of players—including gods, technologies, critters, expected and unexpected “relatives,” and more—and diverse processes, which taken together make the characterization of “kinship” as relations formed solely by genealogical descent and reproduction, or alliance and lineage, unsustainable. There is an immense literature on kinship and on the making of relationships that should not be called genealogical and processes that should not be called reproduction. The Camille Stories rely especially on ethnographies like those of Strathern (The Gender of the Gift and The Relation), Goslinga (“Embodiment and the Metaphysics of Virgin Birth in South India”), and Ramberg (“Troubling Kinship” and Given to the Goddess). The word kin is too important to let the critics have it, and family cannot do the work of kin and its routes/roots to kind, with all the multivalences of that term. My sense of kin making requires not just situated deities and spirits— still an unnerving act for so-called moderns—but also heterogeneous critters of biological persuasions. In Camille’s world, kin making must be sensible in both animist and biological registers. The important words must be resignified, repopulated, and reinhabited. “Making Kin Not Babies” is about making oddkin, including N o t e s t o C h a p t e r reimagining worlding with the help of Daniel Heath Justice’s Kynship Chronicles and website, “Justice, Imagine Otherwise.” sf is indispensable. Marilyn Strathern, immersed in Melanesian worlds, proposed that “a person is the form relationships take, a composite of relations rather than a proprietary individual” (Ramberg, “Troubling Kinship,” ; Strathern, The Gender of the Gift). The Communities of Compost rely on this string figural approach to making morethan-human persons. Motley as a noun is a multihued fabric. Motely as an adjective is about incongruous diversity. I need both tones. Some of the other settlements and migrations of the Communities of Compost focused on the consequences of mining include: () In China, on ruined lands and villages near several coal-mining sites, led by older rural women and Chinese Green movement activists. See “China and Coal.” Thanks to my colleagues Chris Connery and Lisa Rofel and the invaluable Chinese Marxist feminist activist and cultural critic Dai Jinhua for help. () In Alberta and Nunavut in Canada, linked to resistance to tar sands extraction and other fossil fuel projects by indigenous and southern coalitions. () In the Galilee Basin in Australia, in solidarity with Wangan and Jagalingou peoples’ resistance to a Carmichael coal mine. See Palese, “It’s Not Just Indigenous Australians v. Adani.” () In the Navajo and Hopi nations on Black Mesa, in alliance with Anglo, Latino, and native activists. See chapter . () In Peru and Bolivia in solidarity with antimining movements. See de la Cadena, “Indigenous Cosmopolitics in the Andes.” () In the Putumayo region of Colombia, in resistance to its designation for mining and agro-industrial extraction. See K. Lyons, “Soils and Peace” and “Soil Science, Development, and the ‘Elusive Nature’ of Colombia’s Amazonian Plains”; and Forest Peoples Program, “Indigenous Peoples of Putumayo Say No to Mining in Their Territories.” What constitutes reproductive freedom remained a vexed question in the gatherings of the Children of Compost, especially in the first few generations, for which the consequences of vast human numbers on earth were still intense. The Great Acceleration of human numbers began after about and topped out by the end of the twenty-first century, but the process of rebalancing and human reduction without exacerbating deep inequalities was difficult in every imaginable way across the earth. Some of the communities worked to adapt rights approaches, locating decision making in the last instance in persons conceived as individuals. But other communities inherited and invented very different ways of thinking about and practicing making new persons and the ramifying obligations and powers of other persons who were involved. Coercion to make or not to make a new child was considered a crime and could result in banishment from the community, but sometimes violent conflict over bringing new babies into existence or over determining who and what were kin did occur. The Communities of Compost insisted that kin did not mean undifferentiated universal relatedness; exclusions and inclusions remained the name of the game of kin, as it always had. Which exclusions and inclusions, and which expansions and contractions, underwent radical, often bumpy change. The Children of Compost understood recrafting definitions and practices Notes to Chapter of reproductive freedom in symbiotic terms to be one of their chief obligations, but it never stopped being necessary to oppose oppressive and totalitarian forces in the intentional communities, just as it never ceased to be necessary to interrogate the discursive categories marked by “bio-” that informed symbiogenesis. Symbiont and symbiote are synonyms; both refer to an organism living in a state of symbiosis, whether beneficial to one or both (or more) or not. Thus, in our stories, both the human and the nonhuman partner should be called a symbiont or symbiote. Symbiogenesis refers to the cobbling together of living entities to make something new in the biological, rather than digital or some other, mode. Symbiogenesis results in novel sorts of organization, not just novel critters. Symbiogenesis opens up the palette (and palate) of possible collaborative living. Many Communities of Compost decided to nurture symbiogenetic transformations with fungal or plant symbionts as the principal partners for the human babies and fetuses, and all the symbioses necessarily entailed intimate assemblages of bacteria, archaea, protists, viruses, and fungi. Camille’s community was more tightly webbed with others whose children were bonded with animals as their principal partners, but these distinctions weakened over the generations as multispecies socialities of many previously unimagined kinds emerged. For provocative thinking about corridors, see Hannibal, The Spine of the Continent; Soulé and Terborgh, Continental Conservation; Hilty, Lidicker, and Merelender, Corridor Ecology; and Meloy, Eating Stone. The Yellowstone to Yukon Conservation Initiative (see website) is inspiring and critical. I love these sciences and these writings, even as I long for vigorous encounters with sophisticated, situated, multinatural, multilingual, multicultural scholarship—indeed, in a nonromantic, nondismissive, practical mode, with indigenous cosmopolitics and its diverse peoples. For a positive example, see Koelle, “Rights of Way.” The ongoing separations and misunderstandings between decolonial thinking and projects and biodiversity thinking and projects is a tragedy for people, peoples, and other critters alike. Practicing corridor thinking, the Communities of Compost do everything they can to bring these disparate worlds into contact. Ecological Evolutionary Developmental Biology, or EcoEvoDevo, is one of the most important knowledge practices to reshape the sciences in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries ce. See Gilbert and Epel, Ecological Developmental Biology, especially the coda by Gilbert. See “Mountaintop Removal Mining”; Stephens and Sprinkle, Goodbye Gauley Mountain. I am placing Camille’s community in the area along the Kanawha River, where artist Beth Stephens grew up and to which she and her spouse Annie Sprinkle returned to make their film. Making kin, Annie and Beth married the mountain, one of the many earthy spouses they have knitted together in their traveling ecosexual practices. The history and ongoing vitality of working-class culture and politics rooted in coal mining are fundamental to what Camille and per’s community must keep learning. Historically, West Virginia was home and hunting territory to Shawnee, Cherokee, Delaware, Seneca, Wyandot, Ottawa, Tuscarora, Susquehannock, Huron, Sioux, Mingo, Iroquois, and other native peoples. As Scottish and N o t e s t o C h a p t e r Irish settlers pushed west from Virginia in the eighteenth century, many Native Americans sought refuge in the Blue Ridge Mountains. The divergent racial class histories of () the white settler and African American coal-mining families and communities devastated by twentiethand twenty-first-century mountaintopremoval mining and by economic restructuring of the coal industry in West Virginia (King Coal), and () the adjacent Indian/Black Monacan people of Amherst, Virginia, and elsewhere in the Southeast, who also crafted resurgent politics and identities in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, were important for Camille’s community to know if they were to ally effectively with local people for multispecies futures. See Cook, Monacans and Miners. For her account of growing up and returning to West Virginia, see Stephens, “Goodbye Gauley Mountain.” The violence wreaked on land and people by open pit mining is impossible to exaggerate. To compare Appalachia (coal) and Peru (copper), see Gallagher, “Peru,” and “Mountain Justice Summer Convergence.” Surface mining is far from the whole story, a fact made plain by the rapid increase in fracking for natural gas, including in Appalachia; see Cocklin, “Southwestern Plans to Step on the Gas Pedal in Appalachia Next Year.” Oberhauser and Solensky, The Monarch Butterfly; Rea, Oberhauser, and Quinn, Milkweed, Monarchs and More; Pyle, Chasing Monarchs; Kingsolver, Flight Behavior. For controversy based on recent summer counts about whether the numbers of North American monarchs are declining, or whether the migration, but not population sizes, is declining, see Burnett, “Monarch Migration Rebounds” and Kaplan, “Are Monarch Butterflies Really Being Massacred?” See also websites for “Monarch Butterfly”; “Monarch Butterfly Conservation in California”; “Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve”; “West Virginia State Butterfly.” For a good map of the migrations, see “Flight of the Butterflies.” Western monarch butterflies overwinter in California, including my town of Santa Cruz, where we avidly seek them out each year in eucalyptus and Monterey pine and cypress groves at Natural Bridges State Park and Lighthouse Park. Monarchs in Santa Cruz numbered about , in but had plummeted to , by , a few dozen in , and maybe a couple hundred in winter . See Jepsen et al., “Western Monarchs at Risk.” There are approximately milkweed species in North American and about , species worldwide. Tucker, “Community Institutions and Forest Management in Mexico’s Monarch Butterfly Reserve”; Farfán et al., “Mazahua Ethnobotany and Subsistence in the Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve, Mexico”; Zebich-Knos, “A Good Neighbor Policy?”; Vidal, López-Garcia, and Rendón-Salinas, “Trends in Deforestation and Forest Degradation in the Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve in Mexico”; Rendón-Salinas and Tavera-Alonso, “Forest Surface Occupied by Monarch Butterfly Hibernation Colonies in December .” See also “Mazahua People.” Arauho et al., “Zapatista Army of Mazahua Women in Defense of Water,” write: “The Mazahuas are an indigenous people of Mexico, inhabiting the north-western portion of the State of Mexico and north-eastern Notes to Chapter area of Michoacán, with a presence also in the Federal District owing to recent migration. The largest concentration of Mazahua is found in the municipalities of San Felipe del Progreso and San José del Rincón, both in Mexico state (Estado de México), near Toluca. According to the Mexican census Mazahua speakers numbered ,; the last census counted some , Mazahua. The word Mazahua is of Nahuatl origin, meaning ‘the owners of deer,’ probably referring to the rich fauna of the mountainous region inhabited by the Mazahua. However, they refer to themselves as Hñatho.” It was possible that no pregnant person in the following generations would choose to continue the symbiotic bond of a new child with monarch butterflies, but instead would let this symbiosis end in favor of initiating another. Such decisions occurred, but most birth parents of the following generations felt intensely in both flesh and spirit that the five-generational reproductive symbioses were vital for them as well. Born in , Oren R. Lyons Jr., Turtle Clan, Seneca Nation, Haudenosaunee Confederacy, wrote: “We are looking ahead, as is one of the first mandates given us as chiefs, to make sure and to make every decision that we make relate to the welfare and well-being of the seventh generation to come” and “What about the seventh generation? Where are you taking them? What will they have?” See O. Lyons, “An Iroquois Perspective,” , . See also O. Lyons et al., Exiled in the Land of the Free. “The Great Binding Law” reads: “In all of your deliberations in the Confederate Council, in your efforts at law making, in all your official acts, self-interest shall be cast into oblivion. Cast not over your shoulder behind you the warnings of the nephews and nieces should they chide you for any error or wrong you may do, but return to the way of the Great Law, which is just and right. Look and listen for the welfare of the whole people and have always in view not only the present but also the coming generations, even those whose faces are yet beneath the surface of the ground—the unborn of the future Nation” (Constitution of the Iroquois Nations). See also Barker, Native Acts and “Indigenous Feminisms.” For an introduction to extraordinary thinking and research on indigeneity and technoscience, see Kim TallBear website. United Nations, “World Population Prospects.” Professional demographers, who formulated their thinking within the category of “populations,” understood that even extreme war and pandemic disease in the mid-twenty-first century would not much affect the ultimate global burden of billion or so by century’s end. Only a radical one-child policy enforced across the earth could have done that. Aside from being impossible to effect, the unequal, coercive, misogynist, racist, and political implications of that approach were clear even to the most abstract thinkers. The infectious rather than coercive practices of the Communities of Compost were much more radical than a one-child policy, leading to a three-parent norm taking hold rapidly, in a matrix of both traditional and newly invented nonbiogenetic multichild and multigenerational living practices. The history of one-child policies in the twentieth century showed them to be punitive and rooted in coercive and unequal sacrifice. The three-parent approach, which had seemed merely utopian N o t e s t o C h a p t e r at first, proved otherwise, especially in concert with exuberant decolonial practices nurtured by the Children of Compost. Three-or-more parent practices that were developed over several decades by the Communities of Compost proved intensely prochild, proparent, profriendship, and procommunity, for human people and other critters alike. Historians look to this inventive period as a time of proliferation of rituals, ceremonies, and celebrations for making kin sympoietically rather than biogenetically. One of the strongest results of this inventiveness was a resurgence of practices of both child and adult friendship across the earth. See Murphy, “Thinking against Population and with Distributed Futures”; Nelson, Who Counts?; Bashford, Global Population; and Crist, “Choosing a Planet of Life.” In “A Manifesto for Abundant Futures,” Collard, Dempsey, and Sundberg write: “By abundance we mean more diverse and autonomous forms of life and ways of living together. In considering how to enact multispecies worlds, we take inspiration from Indigenous and peasant movements across the globe as well as decolonial and postcolonial scholars” (). The four major genders available in the Western world by the early twenty-first century were cis-female, cis-male, trans-female, and trans-male; but most knowledgeable people considered this list to be misleading, geographically and historically restricted, and impoverished. The beauty of this naming system, however, was its links with stereo-isomerism in chemistry and spatial sensibilities in taxonomizing across domains. Questions like how to be a good cis lover to a trans partner were widely discussed in this early period of gender reformatting. Several members of Camille ’s settlement had been active in trans circles before joining a Community of Compost. The historically anomalous extreme gender binarism of the so-called Modern Period in the West continued to plague both perceptions and naming practices well into the Late Dithering, by which time the Communities of Compost were beginning to make a serious difference for multigender as well as multispecies flourishing. See Weaver, “Trans Species” and “Becoming in Kind.” Robinson, . The dates of the Great Dithering in this sf novel are –, followed by the Years of Crisis with multiple system failures, and then the balkanization of earth into space, with earth left as a necessary but hopeless cesspool of multispecies immiseration and relentless ineffective human action. Oddkin was the colloquial term for other-than-conventional biogenetic relatives. A note on English pronouns: per was the gender-neutral pronoun applying to every person. Marge Piercy in Woman on the Edge of Time suggested this choice as early as . Whether or not a person decided in the course of a life to develop the mindful bodily habitus of one or more genders, per remained the usual pronoun, although some persons preferred a gender descriptive pronoun. Having the advantage of intelligibility in many languages, sym was frequently used as the pronoun for the human and animal partners in a symbiosis or other kinds of radical sympoiesis. In , more than five hundred rare, threatened, or endangered critters (insects, arachnids, molluscs, fish, reptiles, amphibians, birds, mammals) were officially Notes to Chapter registered with the West Virginia Natural Heritage Program. See West Virginia Department of Natural Resources, “Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Animals.” The Appalachian region is a salamander biodiversity hotspot unique on the earth, and mountaintop removal is a major threat through habitat destruction and water pollution. Migratory salamanders that move between dry land and their breeding pools are especially threatened by habitat fragmentation. Higher temperatures from global warming will have major effects on salamander habitat, and protecting corridors for their movement to cool enough habitats is crucial. See Lanno, Amphibian Declines; “Appalachian Salamanders”; “Biodiversity of the Southern Appalachians”; Conservation and Research Center of the Smithsonian National Zoological Park, “Proceedings of the Appalachian Salamander Conservation Workshop, May –, ”; iucn Red List of Threatened Species, “Ambystoma barbouri.” For these wonderful catadromous fish that undergo myriad metamorphoses, there is no more moving and informative account than Prosek, Eels. For official dithering over their protection, see the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, “The American Eel.” American kestrels were not officially threatened as a species in Camille ’s time, but they had declined precipitously in many parts of their range as agribusiness progressively wiped out habitat they depended on. Earlier, kestrels had benefited from less toxic and nonmonocrop agricultural practices, including pasturing animals outdoors, because these raptors prefer open fields, meadows, pastures, and roadside verges to forests for hunting. Also, reforestation in abandoned agricultural fields in the U.S. Northeast is a problem for kestrels. These lovely small falcons prey on diminutive mammals such as voles and mice, small birds and reptiles, and insects like grasshoppers, cicadas, beetles, dragonflies, butterflies, and moths. Kestrel counts made at the Hawk Mountain raptor sanctuary in Pennsylvania showed that these winged predators increased from the s through mid-s, decreased in late s and early s, were relatively stable in late s and early s, and became uncommon by the early s. West Nile virus might have been a significant factor; percent of tested birds had antibodies to this virus by . By the time Camille ’s cohort was born in , despite their long history of coadapting well with people, American kestrels were in deep trouble in many places. Some kestrel populations stay in place year round; others migrate long distances north and south. Unique to the Americas, these kestrels make their living from Tierra del Fuego to the boreal forests of Alaska and Canada. In New Gauley, the best time to look for kestrels is mid-September through mid-October during their migration. See Hawk Mountain, “American Kestrel,” and Hawk Mountain, “Long-Term Study of American Kestrel Reproductive Ecology.” In , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service petitioned for official Endangered Species Act (esa) status for two crayfish living in West Virginia. In both cases, mountaintop-removal coal mining had devastated their waterways. These were the first species of many, whose futures were blasted by mountaintop-removal N o t e s t o C h a p t e r mining, for which esa protection was sought. See the April , , press release of the Center for Biological Diversity, “Two Crayfishes Threatened by Mountain-Top Removal Mining in West Virginia, Kentucky, Virginia Proposed for Endangered Species Act Protection,” which states that crayfish “are considered to be a keystone animal because the holes they dig create habitat used by other species including fish. Crayfish keep streams cleaner by eating decaying plants and animals, and they are eaten, in turn, by fish, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and mammals, making them an important link in the food web. The Big Sandy and Guyandotte River crayfishes are sensitive to water pollution, making them indicator species of water quality.” Scientists called such requirements philopatry; noncompostist Anglophones spoke of patriotism; compostists spoke of love and need for home, this home, not some supposed equivalent. They learned to think that way from the Little Penguins of Sydney Harbor, as they told their stories through van Dooren, Flight Ways. For research into the ecology and evolution of parasites and their hosts as well as the genetics of monarch butterfly migration, see the de Roode Lab website. I learned to think and rethink with the locution “in conflict and collaboration” from the University of California Santa Cruz Research Cluster of Women of Color in Conflict and Collaboration, which was established during Angela Davis’s term as uc Presidential Chair from to . An early twenty-first-century conference in Denmark that examined questions in close relation to the ecological urgencies of the Anthropocene proved especially useful to compostists in New Gauley. From the conference announcement of aura, “Postcolonial Natures”: “Three of the proposed start dates for the Anthropocene directly link planetary change to colonial processes: The Columbian Exchange, a product of Portuguese and Spanish Imperialism; nineteenth century industrialism, an offspring of British colonial efforts; and the ‘Great Acceleration’ of the s, profoundly tied to American imperialism and the forms of consumer capitalism it brought into being . . . Centering questions of power, colonialism, and capitalist relations, the conference aims to probe how histories of inequality and oppression haunt landscapes and shape multispecies relations.” Note that the “Great Acceleration” is precisely the time human numbers on the earth started their devastating rate increases. The connections of human numbers with the questions of this conference are multiple and close. See the websites for “Nausicaä: Character” and “Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind.” The Japanese anime film was released in . Thanks to Anna Tsing for drawing my attention back to this amazing story. In his Insectopedia (–) Hugh Raffles refers to the translation of the twelfthcentury Japanese story as “The Lady Who Loved Worms,” namely, the gorgeous caterpillars of butterflies and moths. The story, “The Lady Who Loved Insects,” is collected among the ten short stories of the Tsutsumi Chūnagon Monogatari, authorship unknown. In an interview in , “The Finale of Nausicaä,” Miyazaki commented that he wanted to create a heroine who was “not consummately normal.” In this same inNotes to Chapter terview, Miyazaki described the Ohmu as larval throughout their lives, the young as well as the adults. No wonder Camille was charmed! See Mirasol, “Commentary on Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind,” a YouTube video by the Filipino film critic Michael Mirasol. Scott Gilbert is my guide to imagining the developmental biological mechanisms to give Camille a beard of butterfly antennae (personal e-mail to the author, April , ): “There could be several ways of grafting butterfly antennae to the human jaw: One is to induce central tolerance. If the community knew that Camille would become affiliated with the monarch, they could inject [the newborn] with the butterfly antennae extracts (presumably grown in culture or from dead butterflies) as soon as [the child is] born. The immune system is still developing and would be trained to recognize these substances as ‘self.’ If the decision comes later in life, one could try inducing clonal anergy with the injection of butterfly material in the absence of certain T-cells. This hasn’t been a great success story, as peripheral tolerance hasn’t exactly cured our allergies yet. So, to the future . . . One interesting way to do it would be to induce the neighboring tissue to become placental! The placenta makes an environment that prevents the mother’s immune system from destroying the fetus. Placentally derived factors appear to make T-regulatory cells and limit T-helper formation (see Svenson-Arveland et al., ‘The Human Fetal Placenta Promotes Tolerance against the Semiallogenic Fetus by Producing Regulatory T Cells and Homeostatic M Macrophages’ for a recent article). Another sf way of doing it might be to have symbiotic bacteria expressing the butterfly antigens induce tolerance. This is being explored as a route to prevent or ameliorate peanut allergies (Ren et al., ‘Modulation of Peanut-Induced Allergic Immune Responses by Oral Lactic Acid Bacteria-Based Vaccines in Mice’) and atopic dermatitis (Farid et al., ‘Effect of a New Synbiotic Mixture on Atopic Dermatitis in Children’). Prolonged contact may induce the antigen-specific T-reg cells. That would be interesting because it would involve a symbiosis to produce the tolerance.” So there were many options for New Gauley scientists to discuss with the fifteen-year-old Camille . Camille first tried the placentally derived factors, but the initial efforts failed. Success was finally achieved by giving Camille symbiotic bacteria that expressed butterfly antennal antigens and induced tolerance for the implants in the human host. From “Butterfly Anatomy”: “The antennae of Monarchs Danaus plexippus are covered in over , olfactory (scent detecting) sensors—some scale-like, others in the form of hairs or olfactory pits. The scale-like sensors, which number about ,, are sensitive to sexual pheromones, and to the honey odour, which enables them to locate sources of nectar. Butterfly antennae, like those of ants and bees, may also be used to communicate physically—e.g., it is common to see male Small Tortoiseshells, Aglais urticae, drumming their antennae on the hindwings of females during courtship, possibly to ‘taste’ pheromones on the female’s wings. . . . Butterflies are often observed ‘antenna dipping’—dabbing the antennal tips onto soil or leaves. In this case they are sampling the substrate to detect its chemical N o t e s t o C h a p t e r qualities. They do this to establish whether soil contains essential nutrients. Male butterflies often drink mineralised moisture to obtain sodium, which they pass to the females during copulation.” In Appalachia coal was king, and the busted unions, blasted towns, ravaged human lungs, resilient people, and disappeared mountains, waters, and critters were at the heart of Camille ’s heritage. Other key regions and peoples for New Gauley and the Camilles were the many indigenous peoples of the Canadian tar sands and the Diné and Hopi of the Black Mesa plateau in struggle with Peabody Energy’s coal operations. See chapter . The Diné (Navajo) hold that the only true evil in the world is greed. The destruction of aquifers, creeks, lakes, seas, wetlands, and rivers through fossil fuel extraction linked the Camilles to the peoples and other critters of the transvolcanic belt in Mexico, winter home of monarch butterflies, where water was diverted in vast transbasin projects across the mountains to Mexico City. Decolonial approaches to multispecies worlding and rehabilitation that helped Camille prepare for per’s sojourn in Mexico: Basso, Wisdom Sits in Places; Danowski and Viveiros de Castro, “L’Arrêt du Monde,” –; de la Cadena, Earth Beings; Escobar, Territories of Difference; Green, Contested Ecologies; Hogan, Power; Kaiser, “Who Is Marching for Pachamama?”; Kohn, How Forests Think; Laduke, All Our Relations; Tsing, Friction; Weisiger, Dreaming of Sheep in Navajo Country. Working for many years in the Putumayo region of Colombia, in “Can There Be Peace with Poison?,” Kristina Lyons argues, “Rural communities articulate increasingly ecological conceptions of territoriality in their struggles to defend not only the possibility for human life, but also the relational existence of a continuum of beings and elements (soils, forests, rivers, insects, animals, food crops, medicinal plants, and humans) sharing the contingencies of life and labor under military duress.” Lyons proposes the term selva as both a theoretical term and situated naturalcultural places. Selva does not do the same colonial work as nature. The compostists remember their heritage from the British anthropologist Marilyn Strathern, who insisted it matters which ideas think other ideas. See also K. Lyons, Fresh Leaves, and de la Cadena, “Uncommoning Nature.” For a taste of the ambiguous, controversial, sometimes vital, sometimes shocking work done by environmental organizations on many sides of “green” questions, see the recent essay by a founder of feminist political ecology, Dianne Rocheleau, “Networked, Rooted and Territorial: Green Grabbing and Resistance in Chiapas.” Birthplace of the Zapatista movements, Chiapas is part of the region Camille came to know well. See Harcourt and Nelson, Practicing Feminist Political Ecologies. A geographer, Rocheleau changed my world from the moment Anna Tsing first placed her writing in my hands in the first of the three graduate seminars we cotaught at ucsc on geofeminisms (in , , and ): Rocheleau and Edmunds, “Women, Men and Trees.” For context for Mazahuan formations since in the setting of Mexican and international indigenous movements, see Gallegos-Ruiz and Larsen, “Universidad Intercultural.” Notes to Chapter Gómez Fuentes, Tire, and Kloster, “The Fight for the Right to Water.” Molina, “Zapatistas’ First School Opens for Session.” The uprising of the Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional began in Chiapas in . For an eloquent story of Amazonian butterflies drinking turtle tears, see Main, “Must See.” Leaving out powerful lines, I take the epigraph above from sections of GallegosRuiz and Larsen, “Universidad Intercultural,” –. In a small girl read the poem in Mazahua and Spanish to the presidential candidate Miguel de la Madrid. For the Spanish poem, see Garduño Cervantes, “Soy mazahua.” For a primary school girl reciting the poem in Spanish in , see Guadalupe, “Soy mazahua.” On the danger of the extinction of the Mazahuan language, see Domínguez, “De la extinción de su lengua mazahua.” I have not found a written or oral version of the poem in Mazahua. Remember, sciences are not Modern in the sense meant here; they are not Science. The poverty of language defeats even avid compostists. Camille had read about the extraordinarily destructive transbasin and panregional water transfers of Colorado River water in the U.S. West in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. A borehole was drilled through the San Jacinto Mountains in Arizona to deliver water to Southern California, and the river was pumped from west to east through a vast trans-Rockies system of tunnels and aqueducts to deliver water to Denver. Lustgarten, “End of the Miracle Machines.” See chapter of Staying with the Trouble. For a pro-engineering approach, see the website of the Colorado Water Users Association. Alliances of indigenous and other environmental groups were critical to shutting down these practices through sustained politics and ecologies organized around environmental justice and just transition. See the websites of the Just Transition Alliance and Indigenous Environmental Network. Enciso L., “Mexico”; Geo-Mexico, “Where Does Mexico City Get Its Water?”; “Water Management in Greater Mexico City,” Wikipedia. In September , Mazahuan women took decisive action. In “The Fight for the Right to Water,” Gómez Fuentes, Tire, and Kloster write: “That was when we said to ourselves: ‘They’re pulling the men’s legs and playing with them, because we’re not seeing any action.’ ‘That was when we decided to gather our courage and lead the struggle,’ says Rosalva Crisóstomo, from San Isidro . . . The affected communities have finally managed to receive some compensation for their flooded fields, the return of lands that were expropriated for the Cutzamala System but never used, and drinking water for many communities, although some have been excluded from these benefits. As part of their plan for the sustainable development of the region, the communities themselves have begun the process of reforestation and wetland restoration. They have organized micro-enterprises and cooperatives for the production and trade of agricultural products, which helps prevent out-migration. But above and beyond all of this, the Mazahua communities have reaffirmed their culture, their identity, and their customs and traditions as a people, as well as recapturing a pride in their language and clothing, especially among the women.” N o t e s t o C h a p t e r In at the Fourth World Water Forum, including the Latin American Water Tribunal, there were many alternative forums and demonstrations. The Mazahua movement was strongly represented. See Trujillo, “The World Water Forum.” In September , Agustina Araujo, Guadalupe Acevedo, Ofelia Lorenzo, and Irma Romero, comandantas of the Zapatista Army of Mazahua Women, gave testimony before the First Symposium of Indigenous Women, who were leading the struggle for resources and territorial control. See “Zapatista Army of Mazahua Women in Defence of Water in the Cutzamala Region,” and Wickstrom, “Cultural Politics and the Essence of Life.” A Community of Compost in Amazonian Peru was especially attuned to the local butterflies, who sip the tears of turtles for vital minerals. In this community, human babies were joined in symbiosis with vulnerable turtles and butterflies. From “Mariposas que beben lágrimas de tortuga”: “Phil Torres, un científico del Centro de Investigación de la Reserva Natural de Tambopata, en Perú, explicó recientemente en la revista LiveScience que estos bonitos insectos alados absorben sodio y otros nutrientes que necesitan de las saladas lágrimas de las tortugas que viven en el Amazonas.” Thanks for this site, and for much else, to Marisol de la Cadena, who teaches me about indigenous cosmopolitics. Russ, Adventures of Alyx; Pullman, His Dark Materials; Czerneda, Beholder’s Eye. Monarchs, their protozoan parasites (Ophryocystis elektroscirrha), milkweeds, and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in the soil associated with the roots of milkweeds constitute a string figural holobiome. The fungi can determine how much of the toxins critical for monarchs to keep their parasites in check will be made by their milkweed food plants. The effects will differ among the many milkweed species and their situated ecologies. Diseases in the soil biota, such as my fabulated twenty-fourth-century runaway viral infection of mycorrhizal fungi important across the taxon of Danainae, can profoundly affect the interactions of other members of the holobiome, such as monarchs and protozoans, resulting in such diseased developmental phenomena as mass failed emergence of adults from the chrysalis. That would be a short-term boon for such critters as paper wasps, which select distressed emergent butterflies as sites to lay their eggs, so that the butterfly corpse can provide food for their offspring. However, large-scale failure of fungal, protozoan, plant, and butterfly holobiomes make wasp eggs fail too, in the end. See Tao et al., “Disease Ecology across Soil Boundaries.” Camille drew insight from Dovey, Only the Animals. In a book review in The Guardian, Romy Ash wrote, “Only the Animals is a story told by the souls of ten dead animals. Each animal is caught up in a human conflict over the [twentieth] century. They tell the stories of their deaths. A mussel speaks of its death in the Pearl Harbour bombings, an elephant from the Mozambique Civil War, a bear of its death during the Bosnia-Herzegovina conflict of .” The Communities of Compost were avid readers of sf, and they drew from Orson Scott Card’s Speaker for the Dead (), the sequel to Ender’s Game, winner of both the Hugo and Nebula Awards. The story was rooted in Ender Wiggin’s unknowing but culpable militaristic, exterminating acts as a young boy against the Notes to Chapter Hive Queen and her species. Wiggin undertook lifelong atonement as Speaker for the Dead, traveling to those unreconciled with each other and with the deceased, collecting up and decomposing the trouble, and recomposing peace for the living and the dead. The species of the Hive Queen was not totally extinct; Ender held open space for resurgence of these sentient insectoid others that remained utterly different from human beings. Communication was never simple, without ruptures and failures; and it was therefore generative of possibilities. Another approach to speakers for the dead is practiced in a contemporary documentary about the deliberately plowed-under nineteenth-century tombstones of the forcibly removed and actively forgotten original black settlers of Princeville, Ontario. See The Original People, “Speakers for the Dead.” Harding, personal communication, October , . See Tagaq, “Animism,” for links to Tagaq’s work and for the tentacular design of the young woman entwined with the two-headed wolf. For the music, go to Tagaq, “Polaris Prize Performance and Introduction.” See also the website for the Animism album trailer. Tagaq, “Tagaq Brings Animism to Studio Q.” Eduardo Viveiros de Castro, personal communication, October , . See Harvey, Handbook of Contemporary Animism. This hymn of the Communities of Compost was sung in ceremonies for resurgence attuned to the wounded earth. This song was inherited from the twentiethand twenty-first-century neopagan witch Starhawk (Truth or Dare, –). Starhawk’s song insists on the importance of feeling pain as an active historical sensibility, as a practice in what Stengers calls an ecology of practices. Quoted also in Stengers, in Hypnose entre magie et science. Precious as a word and a process, resurgence is a gift from Tsing, “A Threat to Holocene Resurgence Is a Threat to Livability.”