The political slogan I wore in the Reagan Star Wars era of the s read, “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival!” The terrifying times of George H. W. Bush and the secondary Bushes made me switch to slogans purloined from tough schutzhund dog trainers, “Run Fast, Bite Hard!” and “Shut Up and Train!” Today my slogan reads, “Stay with the Trouble!” But in all these knots and especially now, wherewhenever that potent and capacious placetime is—we need a hardy, soiled kind of wisdom. Instructed by companion species of the myriad terran kingdoms in all their placetimes, we need to reseed our souls and our home worlds in order to flourish—again, or maybe just for the first time—on a vulnerable planet that is not yet murdered. We need not just reseeding, but also reinoculating with all the fermenting, fomenting, and nutrient-fixing associates that seeds need to thrive. Recuperation is still possible, but only in multispecies alliance, across the killing divisions of nature, culture, and technology and of organism, language, and machine. The feminist cyborg taught me that; the humanimal worlds of dogs, chickens, turtles, and wolves taught me that; and in fugal, fungal, microbial, symbiogenetic counterpoint, the acacia trees of Africa, the Americas, Australia, and the Pacific Islands, with their congeries of associates reaching across taxa, teach me that. Sowing worlds is about opening up the story of companion species to more of its relentless diversity and urgent trouble. To study the kind of situated, mortal, germinal wisdom we need, I turn to Ursula K. Le Guin and Octavia Butler. It matters what stories we tell to tell other stories with; it matters what concepts we think to think other concepts with. It matters wherehow Ouroboros swallows its tale, again. That’s how worlding gets on with itself in dragon time. These are such simple and difficult koans; let us see what kind of get they spawn. A careful student of dragons, Le Guin taught me the carrier bag theory of fiction and of naturalcultural history. Her theories, her stories, are capacious bags for collecting, carrying, and telling the stuff of living. “A leaf a gourd a shell a net a bag a sling a sack a bottle a pot a box a container. A holder. A recipient.” So much of earth history has been told in the thrall of the fantasy of the first beautiful words and weapons, of the first beautiful weapons as words and vice versa. Tool, weapon, word: that is the word made flesh in the image of the sky god. In a tragic story with only one real actor, one real world-maker, the hero, this is the Man-making tale of the hunter on a quest to kill and bring back the terrible bounty. This is the cutting, sharp, combative tale of action that defers the suffering of glutinous, earth-rotted passivity beyond bearing. All others in the prick tale are props, ground, plot space, or prey. They don’t matter; their job is to be in the way, to be overcome, to be the road, the conduit, but not the traveler, not the begetter. The last thing the hero wants to know is that his beautiful words and weapons will be worthless without a bag, a container, a net. Nonetheless, no adventurer should leave home without a sack. How did a sling, a pot, a bottle suddenly get in the story? How do such lowly things keep the story going? Or maybe even worse for the hero, how do those concave, hollowed-out things, those holes in Being, from the get-go generate richer, quirkier, fuller, unfitting, ongoing stories, stories with room for the hunter but which weren’t and aren’t about him, the self-making Human, the human-making machine of history? The slight curve of the shell that holds just a little water, just a few seeds to give away and to receive, suggests stories of becoming-with, of reciprocal induction, of companion species whose job in living and dying is not to end the storying, the worlding. With a shell and a net, becoming human, becoming humus, becoming terran, has another shape—the side-winding, snaky shape of becoming-with. Le Guin quickly assures all of us who are wary of evasive, sentimental holisms and organicisms: “Not, let it be said at once, [am I] an unaggressive or uncombative human being. I am an aging, angry woman laying about me with my handbag, fighting hoodlums off . . . It’s just one of those damned things you have to do in order to go on gathering wild oats and telling stories.” There is room for conflict in Le Guin’s story, but her carrier bag narratives are full of much else in wonderful, messy tales to use for retelling, or reseeding, possibilities for getting on now, as well as in deep earth history. “It sometimes seems that that [heroic] story is approaching its end. Lest there be no more telling of stories at all, some of us out here in the wild oats, amid the alien corn, think we’d better start telling another one, which maybe people can go on with when the old one’s finished . . . Hence it is with a certain feeling of urgency that I seek the nature, subject, words of the other story, the untold one, the life story.” Octavia Butler knows all about the untold stories, the ones that need a restitched seedbag and a traveling sower to hollow out a place to flourish after the catastrophes of that Sharp Story. In Parable of the Sower, the U.S. teenage hyperempath Lauren Oya Olamina grows up in a gated community in Los Angeles. Important in New World Santeria and in Catholic cults of the Virgin Mary, in Yoruba Oya, mother of nine, is the Orisha of the Niger River, with its nine tributaries, its nine tentacles gripping the living and the dead. She is among the chthonic entities of a thousand names, generators of persisting times called the Chthulucene. Wind, creation, and death are Oya’s attributes and powers for worlding. Olamina’s gift and curse were her inescapable abilities to feel the pain of all living beings, a result of a drug taken by her addicted mother during pregnancy. After the murder of her family, the young woman traveled from a devastated and dying society with a motley band of survivors to sow a new community rooted in a religion called Earthseed. In the story arc of what was to be a trilogy (Parable of the Trickster was not completed before her death), Butler’s sf worlding imagined Earthseed ultimately flourishing on a new home world among the stars. But Olamina started the first Earthseed community in Northern California, and it is there and at other sites on Terra where my own explorations for reseeding our home world must stay. This home is where Butler’s lessons apply with special ferocity. In the Parable novels, “God is change,” and Earthseed teaches that the seeds of life on earth can be transplanted and can adapt and flourish in all sorts of unexpected and always dangerous places and times. Note “can,” not necessarily “may” or “should.” Butler’s entire work as an sf writer is riveted on the problem of destruction and wounded flourishing— not simply survival—in exile, diaspora, abduction, and transportation— the earthly gift-burden of the descendants of slaves, refugees, immigrants, travelers, and of the indigenous too. It is not a burden that stops with settlement. In the sf mode, my own writing works and plays only on earth, in the mud of cyborgs, dogs, acacia trees, ants, microbes, fungi, and all their kin and get. With the twist in the belly that etymology brings, I remember too that kin, with the g-k exchange of Indo-European cousins, becomes gen on the way to get. Terran spawn all, we are sidewinding as well as arboreal kindred—blown get—in infected and seedy generation after generation, blowsy kind after blowsy kind. Planting seeds requires medium, soil, matter, mutter, mother. These words interest me greatly for and in the sf terraforming mode of attention. In the feminist sf mode, matter is never “mere” medium to the “informing” seed; rather, mixed in terra’s carrier bag, kin and get have a much richer congress for worlding. Matter is a powerful, mindfully bodied word, the matrix and generatrix of things, kin to the riverine generatrix Oya. It doesn’t take much digging or swimming to get to matter as source, ground, flux, reason, and consequential stuff—the matter of the thing, the generatrix that is simultaneously fluid and solid, mathematical and fleshly—and by that etymological route to one tone of matter as timber, as hard inner wood (in Portuguese, madeira). Matter as timber brings me to Le Guin’s The Word for World Is Forest, published in as part of her Hainish fabulations for dispersed native and colonial beings locked in struggle over imperialist exploitation and the chances for multispecies flourishing. That story took place on another planet and is very like the tale of colonial oppression in the name of pacification and resource extraction that takes place on Pandora in James Cameron’s blockbuster film Avatar. Except one particular detail is very different; Le Guin’s Forest does not feature a repentant and redeemed “white” colonial hero. Her story has the shape of a carrier bag that is disdained by heroes. Also, even as they condemn their chief oppressor to live, rather than killing him after their victory, for Le Guin’s “natives” the consequences of the freedom struggle bring the lasting knowledge of how to murder each other, not just the invader, as well as how to recollect and perhaps relearn to flourish in the face of this history. There is no status quo ante, no salvation tale, like that on Pandora. Instructed by the struggle on Forest’s planet of Athshea, I will stay on Terra and imagine that Le Guin’s Hainish species have not all been of the hominid lineage or web, no matter how dispersed. Matter, mater, mutter make me—make us, that collective gathered in the narrative bag of the Chthulucene—stay with the naturalcultural multispecies trouble on earth, strengthened by the freedom struggle for a postcolonial world on Le Guin’s planet of Athshea. It is time to return to the question of finding seeds for terraforming for a recuperating earthly world of difference, wherewhen the knowledge of how to murder is not scarce. My carrier bag for terraforming is full of acacia seeds, but as we shall see, that collection brings its full share of trouble too. I begin with the decapitated corpse of an ant found by scientist-explorers next to Seed in a row of degerminated acacia seeds at the end of an ant-colony tunnel in Le Guin’s story “‘The Author of the Acacia Seeds’ and Other Extracts from the Journal of the Association of Therolinguistics.” The therolinguists were perplexed in their reading of the touch-gland exudate script that the ant seemed to have written in her biochemical ink on the aligned seeds. The scientists were uncertain both about how to interpret the script and about who the ant was—an intruder killed by the colony’s soldiers? A resident rebel writing seditious messages about the queen and her eggs? A myrmexian tragic poet? The therolinguists could not apply rules from human languages to their task, and their grasp of animal communication was (is) still raggedly fragmentary, full of guesses across profound naturalcultural difference. From the scientific and hermeneutic study of other animal languages recorded in difficult expeditions of discovery, therolinguists held that “language is communication” and that many animals use an active collective kinesthetic semiotics, as well as chemosensory, visual, and tactile language. They might have been troubled about their reading of this unexpected ant’s exudate text, but they felt confident that at least they were engaging therolingistic acts and would someday learn to read them. Plants, however, they speculated, “do not communicate” and so have no language. Something else is going on in the vegetative world, perhaps something that should be called art. Phytolinguistics pursued along these lines by the scientists and explorers was just beginning and would surely require entirely new modes of attention, field methodology, and conceptual invention. The president of the Therolinguists Association waxed lyrical: “If a noncommunicative, vegetative art exists, we must re-think the very elements of our science, and learn a whole new set of techniques. For it is simply not possible to bring the critical and technical skills appropriate to the study of weasel murder-mysteries, or Battrachian erotica, or the tunnel-sagas of the earthworm, to bear on the art of the redwood or the zucchini.” In my view, the president got it right about the need to question the tissues of one’s knowings and ways of knowing in order to respond to nonanthropocentric difference. But a closer look at that decapitated ant and the degerminated acacia seeds should have told those still zoocentric scientists that their sublime aestheticization of plants led them astray about earth-making companion species. Plants are consummate communicators in a vast terran array of modalities, making and exchanging meanings among and between an astonishing galaxy of associates across the taxa of living beings. Plants, along with bacteria and fungi, are also animals’ lifelines to communication with the abiotic world, from sun to gas to rock. To pursue this matter, I need to leave Le Guin’s story for now and instead draw on the stories told by students of symbiosis, symbiogenesis, and ecological evolutionary developmental biology. Acacias and ants can do almost all of the work for me. With fifteen hundred species (about a thousand of which are indigenous to Australia), the genus Acacia is one of the largest genera of trees and shrubs on c h a p t e r s i x earth. Different acacias flourish in temperate, tropical, and desert climates across oceans and continents. They are crucial species maintaining the healthy biodiversity of complex ecologies, housing many lodgers, and nourishing a motley guest list of diners. Relocated from wherever they originated, acacias were the darlings of human colonial foresters and still are the stock-in-trade of landscapers and plant breeders. In those histories, some acacias become the overgrowing destroyers of endemic ecologies that are the special responsibility of restoration biologists and just plain citizens of recuperating places. In part and in whole, acacias show up in the most unexpected places. They give the bounty of the gorgeous hardwoods like Hawaiian koa, which are cut down in greedy, exterminating, global-capitalist excess. Acacias also make the humble polysaccharide gums, including gum arabic from Acacia senegal, which show up in human industrial products like ice cream, hand lotion, beer, ink, jelly beans, and old-fashioned postage stamps. Those same gum exudates are the immune system of the acacias themselves, helping to seal wounds and discourage opportunistic fungi and bacteria. Bees make a prized honey from acacia flowers, among the few honeys that will not crystallize. Many animals, including moths, human beings, and the only known vegetarian spider, use acacias for food. People rely on acacias for seed pastes, fritters made from pods, curries, shoots, toasted seeds, and root beer. Acacias are members of the vast family of legumes. That means that, among their many talents, in association with fungal mycorrhizal symbionts (which host their own bacterial endosymbionts), many acacias fix the nitrogen crucial to soil fertility, plant growth, and animal existence. In defending themselves from grazers and pests, acacias are veritable alkaloid chemical factories, making many compounds that are psychoactive in animals like me. I can only imagine with my hominid brain what these compounds feel like to critters like insects. From giraffes’ points of view, acacias sport lovely leafy salads on their crowns, and the acacias respond to assiduous giraffe pruning by producing the picturesque African savannah flattop tree landscape prized by human photographers and tourist enterprises, not to mention life-saving shade and rest for many critters. Supported within this big narrative netbag, I am ready to add a few details of my own to Le Guin’s ongoing carrier bag story of the decapitated ant and her acacia-seed writing tablet. The therolinguists were worried about the message they tried to decipher in the writing, but I am riveted by what drew ant and acacia seed together in the first place. How did they know each other? How did they communicate? Why did the ant paint her message on that shiny surface? The degerminated seed is the clue. Acacia verticulata, an Australian shrub related to the coastal wattle so worrisome to Southern Californian ecologists, makes seeds that are dispersed by ants. The wily acacias draw the ants’ attention with a showy attachment stalk coiled around every seed. The ants carry the decorated seeds to their nests, where they consume the fat-rich attachment stalks, called elaisosomes, at their leisure. In time, the seeds germinate out of the nice womb provided by the ant tunnels, and the ants have the nutritious, calorie-dense food they need to fuel all those stories of their hard-working habits. In evolutionary-ecological terms, these ants and acacias are necessary to each other’s reproductive business. Some ant-acacia associations are much more elaborate than that, reaching into the internal tissues of each participant, shaping genomes and developmental patterning of the structures and functions of both companion species. Several Central American acacias make large, hollow thornlike structures called stipules that provide shelter for several species of Pseudomyrmex ants. “The ants feed on a secretion of sap on the leaf-stalk and small, lipid-rich [and protein-rich] food-bodies at the tips of the leaflets called Beltian bodies. In return, the ants add protection to the plant against herbivores.” There is nothing like a dedicated bevy of angry, biting ants to make a day’s foraging uncomfortable and the leaf-grazer of whatever species move on to less infested pantries. In the bbc Science and Nature five-part special with David Attenborough, in the episode called “Intimate Relations,” we see these matters in exquisite, sensuous detail. We also witness that “some ants ‘farm’ the trees that give them shelter, creating areas known as ‘Devil’s gardens.’ To make sure these grow without competition, they kill off other seedlings in the surrounding vegetation.” The ants accomplish this task by gnawing methodically through branches and shoots and then injecting formic acid into the conductive tissue of the offending plants. Similar ant-acacia mutualisms occur in Africa. For example, the Whistling Thorn acacias in Kenya provide shelter for ants in the thorns and nectar in extrafloral nectaries for their symbiotic ants, such as Crematogaster mimosae. In turn, the ants protect the plant by attacking large mammalian herbivores and stem-boring beetles that damage the plant. The more one looks, the more the name of the game of living and dying on earth is a convoluted multispecies affair that goes by the name of symbiosis, the yoking together of companion species, at table together. Ants and acacias are both highly diverse, well-populated groups. They c h a p t e r s i x are sometimes world travelers and sometimes homebodies that cannot flourish away from natal countries and natal neighbors. Homebody or traveler, their ways of living and dying have consequences for terrraforming, past and present. Ants and acacias are avid for association with critters of all sorts of sizes and scales, and they are opportunistic in their approaches to living and dying in both evolutionary and organismic or whole group timeplaces. These species in all their complexities and ongoingness both do great harm and sustain whole worlds, sometimes in association with human people, sometimes not. The devil is truly in the details of response-able naturecultures inhabited by accountable companion species. They—we—are here to live and die with, not just think and write with. But also that, also here to sow worlds with, to write in ant exudates on acacia seeds to keep the stories going. No more than Le Guin’s carrier bag story—with the crusty elderly lady ready to use her purse to whack evildoers and the author avid for the mess as well as the order of her bumptious critters, human and not—is my story of these worldly wise symbionts a tale of rectitude and final peace. With Le Guin, I am committed to the finicky, disruptive details of good stories that don’t know how to finish. Good stories reach into rich pasts to sustain thick presents to keep the story going for those who come after. Emma Goldman’s understanding of anarchist love and rage make sense in the worlds of ants and acacias. These companion species are a prompt to shaggy dog stories—growls, bites, whelps, games, snufflings, and all. Symbiogenesis is not a synonym for the good, but for becoming-with each other in response-ability. Finally, and not a moment too soon, sympoesis enlarges and displaces autopoesis and all other self-forming and self-sustaining system fantasies. Sympoesis is a carrier bag for ongoingness, a yoke for becomingwith, for staying with the trouble of inheriting the damages and achievements of colonial and postcolonial naturalcultural histories in telling the tale of still possible recuperation. Le Guin’s therolinguists, even bound in their animal hides, had the vision of these scary and inspiring possibilities: “And with them, or after them, may there not come that even bolder adventurer—the first geolinguist, who, ignoring the delicate, transient lyrics of the lichen, will read beneath it the still less communicative, still more passive, wholly atemporal, cold, volcanic, poetry of the rocks; each one a word spoken, how long ago, by the earth itself, in the immense solitude, the immenser community, of space.” Communicative and mute, the old lady and her purse will be found in Earthseed communities on terra and throughout timespace. Mutter, matter, mother.