Introduction

Trouble is an interesting word. It derives from a thirteenth-century
French verb meaning “to stir up,” “to make cloudy,” “to disturb.” We—all
of us on Terra—live in disturbing times, mixed-up times, troubling and
turbid times. The task is to become capable, with each other in all of
our bumptious kinds, of response. Mixed-up times are overflowing with
both pain and joy—with vastly unjust patterns of pain and joy, with
unnecessary killing of ongoingness but also with necessary resurgence.
The task is to make kin in lines of inventive connection as a practice of
learning to live and die well with each other in a thick present. Our task
is to make trouble, to stir up potent response to devastating events,
as well as to settle troubled waters and rebuild quiet places. In urgent
times, many of us are tempted to address trouble in terms of making
an imagined future safe, of stopping something from happening that
looms in the future, of clearing away the present and the past in order
to make futures for coming generations. Staying with the trouble does
not require such a relationship to times called the future. In fact, staying
with the trouble requires learning to be truly present, not as a vanishing
pivot between awful or edenic pasts and apocalyptic or salvific futures,
but as mortal critters entwined in myriad unfinished configurations of
places, times, matters, meanings.1

Chthulucene is a simple word.2 It is a compound of two Greek roots
(khthôn and kainos) that together name a kind of timeplace for learning to stay with the trouble of living and dying in response-ability on a
damaged earth. Kainos means now, a time of beginnings, a time for ongoing, for freshness. Nothing in kainos must mean conventional pasts,
presents, or futures. There is nothing in times of beginnings that insists
on wiping out what has come before, or, indeed, wiping out what comes
after. Kainos can be full of inheritances, of remembering, and full of
comings, of nurturing what might still be. I hear kainos in the sense of
thick, ongoing presence, with hyphae infusing all sorts of temporalities
and materialities.
Chthonic ones are beings of the earth, both ancient and up-to-theminute. I imagine chthonic ones as replete with tentacles, feelers, digits, cords, whiptails, spider legs, and very unruly hair. Chthonic ones
romp in multicritter humus but have no truck with sky-gazing Homo.
Chthonic ones are monsters in the best sense; they demonstrate and
perform the material meaningfulness of earth processes and critters.
They also demonstrate and perform consequences. Chthonic ones are
not safe; they have no truck with ideologues; they belong to no one;
they writhe and luxuriate in manifold forms and manifold names in
all the airs, waters, and places of earth. They make and unmake; they
are made and unmade. They are who are. No wonder the world’s great
monotheisms in both religious and secular guises have tried again and
again to exterminate the chthonic ones. The scandals of times called the
Anthropocene and the Capitalocene are the latest and most dangerous
of these exterminating forces. Living-with and dying-with each other
potently in the Chthulucene can be a fierce reply to the dictates of both
Anthropos and Capital.
Kin is a wild category that all sorts of people do their best to domesticate. Making kin as oddkin rather than, or at least in addition to, godkin
and genealogical and biogenetic family troubles important matters, like
to whom one is actually responsible. Who lives and who dies, and how, in
this kinship rather than that one? What shape is this kinship, where and
whom do its lines connect and disconnect, and so what? What must be
cut and what must be tied if multispecies flourishing on earth, including
human and other-than-human beings in kinship, are to have a chance?
An ubiquitous figure in this book is sf: science fiction, speculative
fabulation, string figures, speculative feminism, science fact, so far. This
reiterated list whirls and loops throughout the coming pages, in words
 Introduction

and in visual pictures, braiding me and my readers into beings and patterns at stake. Science fact and speculative fabulation need each other,
and both need speculative feminism. I think of sf and string figures in a
triple sense of figuring. First, promiscuously plucking out fibers in clotted and dense events and practices, I try to follow the threads where they
lead in order to track them and find their tangles and patterns crucial
for staying with the trouble in real and particular places and times. In
that sense, sf is a method of tracing, of following a thread in the dark,
in a dangerous true tale of adventure, where who lives and who dies and
how might become clearer for the cultivating of multispecies justice.
Second, the string figure is not the tracking, but rather the actual thing,
the pattern and assembly that solicits response, the thing that is not
oneself but with which one must go on. Third, string figuring is passing
on and receiving, making and unmaking, picking up threads and dropping them. sf is practice and process; it is becoming-with each other in
surprising relays; it is a figure for ongoingness in the Chthulucene.
The book and the idea of “staying with the trouble” are especially impatient with two responses that I hear all too frequently to the horrors of
the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene. The first is easy to describe and,
I think, dismiss, namely, a comic faith in technofixes, whether secular or
religious: technology will somehow come to the rescue of its naughty but
very clever children, or what amounts to the same thing, God will come
to the rescue of his disobedient but ever hopeful children. In the face
of such touching silliness about technofixes (or techno-apocalypses),
sometimes it is hard to remember that it remains important to embrace
situated technical projects and their people. They are not the enemy;
they can do many important things for staying with the trouble and for
making generative oddkin.
The second response, harder to dismiss, is probably even more destructive: namely, a position that the game is over, it’s too late, there’s no
sense trying to make anything any better, or at least no sense having any
active trust in each other in working and playing for a resurgent world.
Some scientists I know express this kind of bitter cynicism, even as they
actually work very hard to make a positive difference for both people and
other critters. Some people who describe themselves as critical cultural
theorists or political progressives express these ideas too. I think the
odd coupling of actually working and playing for multispecies flourishing with tenacious energy and skill, while expressing an explicit “game
over” attitude that can and does discourage others, including students,
Introduction

is facilitated by various kinds of futurisms. One kind seems to imagine
that only if things work do they matter—or, worse, only if what I and
my fellow experts do works to fix things does anything matter. More
generously, sometimes scientists and others who think, read, study, agitate, and care know too much, and it is too heavy. Or, at least we think
we know enough to reach the conclusion that life on earth that includes
human people in any tolerable way really is over, that the apocalypse
really is nigh.
That attitude makes a great deal of sense in the midst of the earth’s
sixth great extinction event and in the midst of engulfing wars, extractions, and immiserations of billions of people and other critters for
something called “profit” or “power”—or, for that matter, called “God.”
A game-over attitude imposes itself in the gale-force winds of feeling,
not just knowing, that human numbers are almost certain to reach more
than 11 billion people by 2100. This figure represents a 9-billion-person
increase over 150 years from 1950 to 2100, with vastly unequal consequences for the poor and the rich—not to mention vastly unequal
burdens imposed on the earth by the rich compared to the poor—and
even worse consequences for nonhumans almost everywhere. There are
many other examples of dire realities; the Great Accelerations of the
post–World War II era gouge their marks in earth’s rocks, waters, airs,
and critters. There is a fine line between acknowledging the extent and
seriousness of the troubles and succumbing to abstract futurism and its
affects of sublime despair and its politics of sublime indifference.
This book argues and tries to perform that, eschewing futurism, staying with the trouble is both more serious and more lively. Staying with
the trouble requires making oddkin; that is, we require each other in
unexpected collaborations and combinations, in hot compost piles. We
become-with each other or not at all. That kind of material semiotics
is always situated, someplace and not noplace, entangled and worldly.
Alone, in our separate kinds of expertise and experience, we know both
too much and too little, and so we succumb to despair or to hope, and
neither is a sensible attitude. Neither despair nor hope is tuned to the
senses, to mindful matter, to material semiotics, to mortal earthlings
in thick copresence. Neither hope nor despair knows how to teach us to
“play string figures with companion species,” the title of the first 
this book.
Three long chapters open Staying with the Trouble. Each 
stories and figures for making kin in the Chthulucene in order to cut
 Introduction

the bonds of the Anthropocene and Capitalocene. Pigeons in all their
worldly diversity—from creatures of empire, to working men’s racing
birds, to spies in war, to scientific research partners, to collaborators in
art activisms on three continents, to urban companions and pests—are
the guides in chapter 1.
In their homely histories, pigeons lead into a practice of “tentacular
thinking,” the title of the second chapter. Here, I expand the argument
that bounded individualism in its many flavors in science, politics, and
philosophy has finally become unavailable to think with, truly no longer
thinkable, technically or any other way. Sympoiesis—making-with—is a
keyword throughout the chapter, as I explore the gifts for needed thinking offered by theorists and storytellers. My partners in science studies,
anthropology, and storytelling—Isabelle Stengers, Bruno Latour, Thom
van Dooren, Anna Tsing, Marilyn Strathern, Hannah Arendt, Ursula Le
Guin, and others—are my companions throughout tentacular thinking. With their help, I introduce the three timescapes of the book: the
Anthropocene, the Capitalocene, and the Chthulucene. Allied with the
Pacific day octopus, Medusa, the only mortal Gorgon, figured as the Mistress of the Animals, saves the day and ends the chapter.
“Symbiogenesis and the Lively Arts of Staying with the Trouble,”
chapter 3, spins out the threads of sympoiesis in ecological evolutionary
developmental biology and in art/science activisms committed to four
iconic troubled places: coral reef holobiomes, Black Mesa coal country
in Navajo and Hopi lands and other fossil fuel extraction zones impacting especially ferociously on indigenous peoples, complex lemur forest
habitats in Madagascar, and North American circumpolar lands and
seas subject to new and old colonialisms in the grip of rapidly melting
ice. This 
string figures with the threads of reciprocating
energies of biologies, arts, and activisms for multispecies resurgence.
Navajo-Churro sheep, orchids, extinct bees, lemurs, jellyfish, coral polyps, seals, and microbes play leading roles with their artists, biologists,
and activists throughout the chapter. Here and throughout the book,
the sustaining creativity of people who care and act animates the action. Not surprisingly, contemporary indigenous people and peoples, in
conflict and collaboration with many sorts of partners, make a sensible
difference. Biologists, beginning with the incomparable Lynn Margulis,
infuse the thinking and playing of this chapter.
“Making Kin,” chapter 4, is both a reprise of the timescapes of Anthropocene, Capitalocene, and Chthulucene, and a plea to “Make Kin
Introduction

Not Babies.” Antiracist, anticolonial, anticapitalist, proqueer feminists
of every color and from every people have long been leaders in the movement for sexual and reproductive freedom and rights, with particular
attention to the violence of reproductive and sexual orders for poor
and marginalized people. Feminists have been leaders in arguing that
sexual and reproductive freedom means being able to bring children,
whether one’s own or those of others, to robust adulthood in health
and safety in intact communities. Feminists have also been historically
unique in insisting on the power and right of every woman, young or
old, to choose not to have a child. Cognizant of how easily such a position repeats the arrogances of imperialism, feminists of my persuasion
insist that motherhood is not the telos of women and that a woman’s
reproductive freedom trumps the demands of patriarchy or any other
system. Food, jobs, housing, education, the possibility of travel, community, peace, control of one’s body and one’s intimacies, health care,
usable and woman-friendly contraception, the last word on whether or
not a child will be born, joy: these and more are sexual and reproductive
rights. Their absence around the world is stunning. For excellent reasons, the feminists I know have resisted the languages and policies of
population control because they demonstrably often have the interests
of biopolitical states more in view than the well-being of women and
their people, old and young. Resulting scandals in population control
practices are not hard to find. But, in my experience, feminists, including science studies and anthropological feminists, have not been willing
seriously to address the Great Acceleration of human numbers, fearing
that to do so would be to slide once again into the muck of racism, classism, nationalism, modernism, and imperialism.
But that fear is not good enough. Avoidance of the urgency of almost
incomprehensible increases in human numbers since 1950 can slip into
something akin to the way some Christians avoid the urgency of climate change because it touches too closely on the marrow of one’s faith.
How to address the urgency is the question that must burn for staying
with the trouble. What is decolonial feminist reproductive freedom in a
dangerously troubled multispecies world? It cannot be just a humanist
affair, no matter how anti-imperialist, antiracist, anticlassist, and prowoman. It also cannot be a “futurist” affair, attending mainly to abstract
numbers and big data, but not to the differentiated and layered lives
and deaths of actual people. Still, a 9 billion increase of human beings
over 150 years, to a level of 11 billion by 2100 if we are lucky, is not just
 Introduction

a number; and it cannot be explained away by blaming Capitalism or
any other word starting with a capital letter. The need is stark to think
together anew across differences of historical position and of kinds of
knowledge and expertise.
“Awash in Urine,” chapter 5, begins with personal and intimate relations, luxuriating in the consequences of following estrogens that connect an aging woman and her elder dog, specifically, me and my companion and research associate Cayenne. Before the threads of the string
figure have been tracked far, remembering their cyborg littermates,
woman and dog find themselves in histories of veterinary research, Big
Pharma, horse farming for estrogen, zoos, des feminist activism, interrelated animal rights and women’s health actions, and much more.
Intensely inhabiting specific bodies and places as the means to cultivate
the capacity to respond to worldly urgencies with each other is the core
theme.
Ursula K. Le Guin, Octavia Butler, and ants and acacia seeds populate
chapter 6, “Sowing Worlds.” The task is to tell an sf adventure story
with acacias and their associates as the protagonists. It turns out that
Le Guin’s carrier bag theory of narrative comes to the rescue, along with
biologist Deborah Gordon’s theories about ant interactions and colony
behavior, to elaborate the possibilities of ecological evolutionary developmental biology and nonhierarchical systems theories for shaping the
best stories. Science fiction and science fact cohabit happily in this tale.
With Le Guin as their scribe, the prose of acacia seeds and the lyrics of
lichens give way to the mute poetics of rocks in the final passages.
“A Curious Practice,” chapter 7, draws close to the philosopher, psychologist, animal-human student, and cultural theorist Vinciane Despret because of her incomparable ability to think-with other beings,
human or not. Despret’s work on attunement and on critters rendering
each other capable of unexpected feats in actual encounters is necessary
to staying with the trouble. She attends not to what critters are supposed to be able to do, by nature or education, but to what beings evoke
from and with each other that was truly not there before, in nature or
culture. Her kind of thinking enlarges the capacities of all the players;
that is her worlding practice. The urgencies of the Anthropocene, Capitalocene, and Chthulucene demand that kind of thinking beyond inherited
categories and capacities, in homely and concrete ways, like the sorts
of things Arabian babblers and their scientists get up to in the Negev
desert. Despret teaches how to be curious, as well as how to mourn by
Introduction

bringing the dead into active presence; and I needed her touch before
writing the concluding stories of Staying with the Trouble. Her curious
practice prepared me to write about the Communities of Compost and
the tasks of speakers for the dead, as they work for earthly multispecies
recuperation and resurgence.
“The Camille Stories: Children of Compost” closes this book. This invitation to a collective speculative fabulation follows five generations of
a symbiogenetic join of a human child and monarch butterflies along the
many lines and nodes of these insects’ migrations between Mexico and
the United States and Canada. These lines trace socialities and materialities crucial to living and dying with critters on the edge of disappearance
so that they might go on. Committed to nurturing capacities to respond,
cultivating ways to render each other capable, the Communities of Compost appeared all over the world in the early twenty-first century on
ruined lands and waters. These communities committed to help radically reduce human numbers over a few hundred years while developing
practices of multispecies environmental justice of myriad kinds. Every
new child had at least three human parents; and the pregnant parent
exercised reproductive freedom in the choice of an animal symbiont for
the child, a choice that ramified across the generations of all the species.
The relations of symbiogenetic people and unjoined humans brought
many surprises, some of them deadly, but perhaps the deepest surprises
emerged from the relations of the living and the dead, in symanimagenic
complexity, across the holobiomes of earth.
Lots of trouble, lots of kin to be going on with.

 Introduction

Multispecies Storytelling and the
Practices of Companions

String figures are like stories; they propose and enact patterns for participants to inhabit, somehow, on a vulnerable and wounded earth.1 My
multispecies storytelling is about recuperation in complex histories that
are as full of dying as living, as full of endings, even genocides, as beginnings. In the face of unrelenting historically specific surplus suffering
in companion species knottings, I am not interested in reconciliation or
restoration, but I am deeply committed to the more modest possibilities
of partial recuperation and getting on together. Call that staying with
the trouble. And so I look for real stories that are also speculative fabulations and speculative realisms. These are stories in which multispecies players, who are enmeshed in partial and flawed translations across
difference, redo ways of living and dying attuned to still possible finite
flourishing, still possible recuperation.
sf is a sign for science fiction, speculative feminism, science fantasy,
speculative fabulation, science fact, and also, string figures. Playing
games of string figures is about giving and receiving patterns, dropping
threads and failing but sometimes finding something that works, something consequential and maybe even beautiful, that wasn’t there before,
of relaying connections that matter, of telling stories in hand upon hand,
digit upon digit, attachment site upon attachment site, to craft conditions for finite flourishing on terra, on earth. String figures require holding still in order to receive and pass on. String figures can be played
by many, on all sorts of limbs, as long as the rhythm of accepting and
giving is sustained. Scholarship and politics are like that too—passing
on in twists and skeins that require passion and action, holding still and
moving, anchoring and launching.
Racing pigeons in Southern California, along with their diverse people, geographies, other critters, technologies, and knowledges, shape
practices of living and dying in rich worldings that I think of as string
figure games. This chapter, enabled by diverse actual pigeons and their
rich tracings, is the opening pattern of a cluster of knots. The critters
of all my stories inhabit an n-dimensional niche space called Terrapolis. My fabulated multiple integral equation for Terrapolis is at once
a story, a speculative fabulation, and a string figure for multispecies
worlding.

Ω
∫ Terra[x]n = ∫∫∫∫ . . . ∫∫Terra(x1,x2,x3,x4, . . . ,xn,t) dx1 dx2 dx3 dx4 . . . dxndt = Terrapolis
_

x1 = stuff/physis, x2 = capacity, x3 = sociality, x4 = materiality, xn =
dimensions-yet-to-come
_ (alpha) = EcologicalEvolutionaryDevelopmental Biology’s multispecies epigenesis
Ω (omega) = recuperating terra’s pluriverse
t = worlding time, not container time, entangled times of past/present
yet to come
Terrapolis is a fictional integral equation, a speculative fabulation.
Terrapolis is n-dimensional niche space for multispecies becomingwith.
Terrapolis is open, worldly, indeterminate, and polytemporal.
Terrapolis is a chimera of materials, languages, histories.
Terrapolis is for companion species, cum panis, with bread, at table
together—not “posthuman” but “com-post.”
Terrapolis is in place; Terrapolis makes space for unexpected companions.
Terrapolis is an equation for guman, for humus, for soil, for ongoing
risky infection, for epidemics of promising trouble, for permaculture.
Terrapolis is the sf game of response-ability.2
Companion species are engaged in the old art of terraforming; they
are the players in the sf equation that describes Terrapolis. Finished
once and for all with Kantian globalizing cosmopolitics and grumpy
human-exceptionalist Heideggerian worlding, Terrapolis is a mongrel
word composted with a mycorrhiza of Greek and Latin rootlets and
their symbionts. Never poor in world, Terrapolis exists in the sf web of
always-too-much connection, where response-ability must be cobbled
together, not in the existentialist and bond-less, lonely, Man-making gap
theorized by Heidegger and his followers. Terrapolis is rich in world, inoculated against posthumanism but rich in com-post, inoculated against
human exceptionalism but rich in humus, ripe for multispecies storytelling. This Terrapolis is not the home world for the human as Homo,
that ever parabolic, re- and de-tumescing, phallic self-image of the same;
but for the human that is transmogrified in etymological Indo-European
sleight of tongue into guman, that worker of and in the soil.3 My sf critters are beings of the mud more than the sky, but the stars too shine in
Terrapolis. In Terrapolis, shed of masculinist universals and their politics
of inclusion, guman are full of indeterminate genders and genres, full of
kinds-in-the-making, full of significant otherness. My scholar-friends in
linguistics and ancient civilizations tell me that this guman is adama
adam, composted from all available genders and genres and competent
to make a home world for staying with the trouble. This Terrapolis has
kin-making, string figure, sf relations with Isabelle Stengers’s kind of
fleshy cosmopolitics and sf writers’ practices of worlding.
The British social anthropologist Marilyn Strathern, who wrote The
Gender of the Gift based on her ethnographic work in highland Papua
New Guinea (Mt. Hagen), taught me that “it matters what ideas we use
to think other ideas (with).”4 Strathern is an ethnographer of thinking
practices. She embodies for me the arts of feminist speculative fabulation in the scholarly mode. It matters what matters we use to think other
matters with; it matters what stories we tell to tell other stories with;
it matters what knots knot knots, what thoughts think thoughts, what
descriptions describe descriptions, what ties tie ties. It matters what
stories make worlds, what worlds make stories. Strathern wrote about
accepting the risk of relentless contingency; she thinks about anthropology as the knowledge practice that studies relations with relations,
that puts relations at risk with other relations, from unexpected other
worlds. In 1933, Alfred North Whitehead, the American mathematician and process philosopher who infuses my sense of worlding, wrote
The Adventures of Ideas.5 sf is precisely full of such adventures. Isabelle
Stengers, a chemist, scholar of Whitehead and Gilles Deleuze, radical
thinker about materiality in sciences, and an unruly feminist philosopher, gives me “speculative thinking” in abundance. With Isabelle
Stengers we cannot denounce the world in the name of an ideal world.
In the spirit of feminist communitarian anarchism and the idiom of
Whitehead’s philosophy, she maintains that decisions must take place
somehow in the presence of those who will bear their consequences.
That is what she means by cosmopolitics.6
In relay and return, sf morphs in my writing and research into
speculative fabulation and string figures. Relays, string figures, passing patterns back and forth, giving and receiving, patterning, holding
the unasked-for pattern in one’s hands, response-ability; that is core to
what I mean by staying with the trouble in serious multispecies worlds.
Becoming-with, not becoming, is the name of the game; becoming-with
is how partners are, in Vinciane Despret’s terms, rendered capable.7 On12 c h a p t e r o n e

tologically heterogeneous partners become who and what they are in
relational material-semiotic worlding. Natures, cultures, subjects, and
objects do not preexist their intertwined worldings.
Companion species are relentlessly becoming-with. The category
companion species helps me refuse human exceptionalism without
invoking posthumanism. Companion species play string figure games
where who is/are to be in/of the world is constituted in intra-and interaction.8 The partners do not precede the knotting; species of all kinds are
consequent upon worldly subject- and object-shaping entanglements.
In human-animal worlds, companion species are ordinary beings-inencounter in the house, lab, field, zoo, park, truck, office, prison, ranch,
arena, village, human hospital, forest, slaughterhouse, estuary, vet clinic,
lake, stadium, barn, wildlife preserve, farm, ocean canyon, city streets,
factory, and more.
Although they are among humanity’s oldest games, string figures are
not everywhere the same game. Like all offspring of colonizing and imperial histories, I—we—have to relearn how to conjugate worlds with
partial connections and not universals and particulars. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, European and Euro-American
ethnologists collected string figure games from all over the world; these
discipline-making travelers were surprised that when they showed the
string figure games they had learned as children at home, their hosts already knew such games and often in greater variety. String figure games
came late to Europe, probably from Asian trade routes. All of the epistemological desires and fables of this period of the history of comparative
anthropology were ignited by the similarities and differences, with their
undecidably independent inventions or cultural diffusions, tied together
by the threads of hand and brain, making and thinking, in the relays of
patterning in “Native” and “Western” string figure games.9 In comparative tension, the figures were both the same and not the same at all; sf is
still a risky game of worlding and storying; it is staying with the trouble.
Figure 1.2 shows the hands of the science writer and natural history
radio producer Rusten Hogness10 learning a Navajo string figure called
Ma’ii Ats’áá’ Yílwoí (in English “Coyotes Running Opposite Ways”). Coyote is the trickster who constantly scatters the dust of disorder into the
orderly star patterns made by the Fire God, setting up the noninnocent
world-making performances of disorder and order that shape the lives of
terran critters. In the Navajo language, string games are called na’atl’o’.
Navajo string games will reappear in my multispecies storytelling about

Ma’ii Ats’áá’ Yílwoí (Coyotes Running Opposite Ways).
Photograph by Donna Haraway.

Navajo-Churro sheep and the women and men who wove and weave
lives with and from them, but these games are needed in this chapter
too, for thinking with pigeons in Los Angeles and beyond. Cat’s cradle
and jeux de ficelle are not enough; the knots must ramify and double
back in many attachment sites in Terrapolis. Navajo string games are
one form of “continuous weaving,” practices for telling the stories of the
constellations, of the emergence of the People, of the Diné.11
These string figures are thinking as well as making practices, pedagogical practices and cosmological performances. Some Navajo thinkers
describe string games as one kind of patterning for restoring hózhó, a
term imperfectly translated into English as “harmony,” “beauty,” “order,”
and “right relations of the world,” including right relations of humans
and nonhumans. Not in the world, but of the world; that crucial difference in English prepositions is what leads me to weave Navajo string
figures, na’atl’o’, into the web of sf worlding. The worlds of sf are not
containers; they are patternings, risky comakings, speculative fabulations. In sf on Terrapolis, recuperation is in partial connection to hózhó.
It matters which ideas we think other ideas with; my thinking or making cat’s cradle with na’atl’o’ is not an innocent universal gesture, but
a risky proposition in relentless historical relational contingency. And
these contingencies include abundant histories of conquest, resistance,
recuperation, and resurgence. Telling stories together with historically
situated critters is fraught with the risks and joys of composing a more
livable cosmopolitics.
Pigeons will be my first guides. Citizens of Terrapolis, pigeons are
members of opportunistic social species who can and do live in a myriad of times and places. Highly diverse, they occupy many categories in
many languages, sorted in English terms into wild and domestic worlds,
but those particular oppositions are not general or universal, even in
the so-called West. The varied and proliferating specificities of pigeons
are astonishing. Codomesticated with their people, these other-thanhuman critters nurture the kind of trouble important to me. Pigeons
have very old histories of becoming-with human beings. These birds tie
their people into knots of class, gender, race, nation, colony, postcolony,
and—just maybe—recuperating terra-yet-to-come.
Pigeons are also “creatures of empire”—that is, animals who went
with European colonists and conquerors all over the world, including
places where other varieties of their kind were already well established,
transforming ecologies and politics for everybody in ways that still
ramify through multispecies flesh and contested landscapes.12 Hardly
always colonists, pigeons belong to kinds and breeds indigenous to many
places, in uncounted configurations of living and dying. Building naturalcultural economies and lives for thousands of years, these critters
are also infamous for ecological damage and biosocial upheaval. They
are treasured kin and despised pests, subjects of rescue and of invective, bearers of rights and components of the animal-machine, food and
neighbor, targets of extermination and of biotechnological breeding and
multiplication, companions in work and play and carriers of disease,
contested subjects and objects of “modern progress” and “backward tradition.” Besides all that, kinds of pigeons vary, and vary, and then vary
some more, with kinds for nearly every spot on terra.
Becoming-with people for several thousand years, domestic pigeons
(Columba livia domestica) emerged from birds native to western and
southern Europe, North Africa, and western and southern Asia. Rock
doves came with Europeans to the Americas, entering North America
through Port Royal in Nova Scotia in 1606. Everywhere they have gone,
these cosmopolitical pigeons occupy cities with gusto, where they incite human love and hatred in extravagant measure. Called “rats with
wings,” feral pigeons are subjects of vituperation and extermination, but
they also become cherished opportunistic companions who are fed and
watched avidly all over the world. Domestic rock doves have worked as
spies carrying messages, racing birds, fancy pigeons at fairs and bird
markets, food for working families, psychological test subjects, Darwin’s interlocutors on the power of artificial selection, and more. Feral
pigeons are a favorite food for urban raptors, like peregrine falcons, who,
after recovering from near extermination from ddt-thinned eggshells,
have taken up life on bridges and ledges of city skyscrapers.
Pigeons are competent agents—in the double sense of both delegates and actors—who render each other and human beings capable
of situated social, ecological, behavioral, and cognitive practices. Their
worlding is expansive, and the sf games in this 
not touch
very many, much less all, of the threads tied with and by these birds.13
My sf game tracks modest, daring, contemporary, risk-filled projects
for recuperation, in which people and animals tangle together in innovative ways that might, just barely possibly, render each other capable
of a finite flourishing—now and yet to come. The collaborations among
differently situated people—and peoples—are as crucial as, and enabled
by, those between the humans and animals. Pigeons fly us not into collaborations in general, but into specific crossings from familiar worlds
into uncomfortable and unfamiliar ones to weave something that might
come unraveled, but might also nurture living and dying in beauty in the
n-dimensional niche space of Terrapolis. My hope is that these knots
propose promising patterns for multispecies response-ability inside ongoing trouble.
California Racing Pigeons and Their People:
Collaborating Arts for Worldly Flourishing

Becoming-With; Rendering-Capable
The capabilities of pigeons surprise and impress human beings, who
often forget how they themselves are rendered capable by and with both
things and living beings. Shaping response-abilities, things and living
beings can be inside and outside human and nonhuman bodies, at different scales of time and space. All together the players evoke, trigger,
and call forth what—and who—exists. Together, becoming-with and
rendering-capable invent n-dimensional niche space and its inhabitants.

Bird Man of the Mission, mural of a homeless mentally ill man called Lone Star
Swan and some of the urban pigeons who have been his friends and companions
on the street in San Francisco’s Mission District. Painted by Daniel Doherty in
 within the Clarion Alley Mural Project, this work was heavily tagged and
finally painted over in 2013. Written for the Street Art SF team by Jane Bregman
and posted on October 7, 2014, the story of The Bird Man of the Mission is on the
website of Street Art SF. Photograph by James Clifford, ©2009. Courtesy of Daniel
Doherty and the Clarion Alley Mural Project.

What results is often called nature. Pigeon natures in these coproduced
senses matter to my sf story.
Pigeons released in unfamiliar places find their way back to their home
lofts from thousands of kilometers away even on cloudy days.14 Pigeons
have the map sense and compass sense that have endeared them to pigeon fanciers who race them for sport, scientists who study them for the
behavioral neurobiology of orientation and navigation, spies who wish
to send messages across enemy territory, and writers of mystery novels
who call on a good pigeon to carry secrets.15 Almost always men and
boys, racing enthusiasts around the world—with perhaps the hottest
spots of the sport on the rooftops of cities like Cairo and Istanbul and
of immigrant Muslim neighborhoods in European cities like Berlin—
selectively breed and elaborately nurture their talented birds to specialize in fast and accurate homing from release points. Ordinary feral pigeons are no slouches at getting home either.
Pigeons will use familiar landmarks to find their way, and they are
very good at recognizing and discriminating objects and masses below
them during flight. In Project Sea Hunt in the 1970s and ’80s, the U.S.
Coast Guard worked with pigeons, who were better at spotting men and
equipment in open water than human beings.16 Indeed, pigeons were
accurate 93 percent of the time, compared to human accuracy in similar
problems of 38 percent. The pigeons perched in an observation bubble
on the underside of a helicopter, where they pecked keys to indicate
their finds. When they worked with their people instead of in isolation,
pigeons were nearly 100 percent accurate. Clearly, the pigeons and Coast
Guard personnel had to learn how to communicate with each other, and
the pigeons had to learn what their humans were interested in seeing.
In nonmimetic ways, people and birds had to invent pedagogical and
technological ways to render each other capable in problems novel to all
of them. The pigeons never graduated to jobs to save real shipwreck victims, however, because in 1983, after two helicopters crashed and federal
money was cut for the research, the project was ended.
Not very many kinds of other-than-human critters have convinced human skeptics that the animals recognize themselves in a mirror—a talent
made known to scientists by such actions as picking at paint spots or
other marks on one’s body that are visible only in a mirror. Pigeons share
this capacity with, at least, human children over two years old, rhesus macaques, chimpanzees, magpies, dolphins, and elephants.17 So-called selfrecognition carries great weight in Western-influenced psychology and
philosophy, besotted by individualism in theory and method, as these
fields have been. Devising tests to show who can and can’t do it is something of a competitive epistemological sport. Pigeons passed their first
mirror tests in the laboratories of B. F. Skinner in 1981.18 In 2008, Science
News reported that Keio University researchers showed that, even with
five- to seven-second time delays, pigeons did better at self-recognition
tests with both mirrors and live video images of themselves than threeyear-old human children.19 Pigeons pick out different people in photographs very well too, and in Professor Shigeru Watanabe’s Laboratory of
Comparative Cognitive Neuroscience at Keio University, pigeons could
tell the difference between paintings by Monet or Picasso, and even generalize to discriminate unfamiliar paintings from different styles and
schools by various painters.20 It would be a mistake to start building the
predictable arguments along the lines of “my bird-brain cognition is better than or equal to your ape-brain cognition.” What is happening seems
to me to be more interesting than that, and more pregnant with consequences for getting on well with each other, for caring in both emergent
similarity and difference. Pigeons, people, and apparatus have teamed
up to make each other capable of something new in the world of multispecies relationships.
It is all very well to offer proof of becoming a self-recognizing self
in certain kinds of setups, but it is surely as critical to be able to recognize one another and other beings in ways that make sense to the sorts
of lives the critters will lead, whether in racing-pigeon lofts or urban
squares. Scientists do very interesting research on these topics, but here
I want instead to tune in to the online Racing Pigeon Post essays by Tanya
Berokoff. A teacher in speech communication and lifelong companion
with other animals, she is a member of the Palomar Racing Pigeon Club
in California with her husband, John Berokoff, who races the birds with
mostly other men. Drawing on her social science knowledge and on
American popular culture, Tanya Berokoff explicitly uses psychologist
John Bowlby’s attachment theory and Tina Turner’s lyrics for “What’s
Love Got to Do with It?” to talk about how fanciers assist pigeon parents
to raise their youngsters and help them feel competent and safe as they
mature into calm, confident, reliable, socially competent, home-seeking
racers.21 She describes pigeon people’s obligation to put themselves in
the place of the pigeons to understand their ways of knowing and their
social practices, and the idiom Berokoff uses for knowledge is love, including but not only instrumental love. The actors are both pigeons and
people, in inter- and intraspecies relatings. She describes the details
of the gestures and postures of pigeons with each other, the time they
spend with each other, and what they do to fill that time. She concludes,
“It would seem that our pigeons do quite a good job of exhibiting an
agape type of love toward each other . . . Our pigeons are actually doing
the work of real love.” For her, the “work of real love” is “not about an
emotional need to fall in love but to be genuinely loved by another.”22
Meeting that need for their columbine social partners, she says, is what
the pigeons seem to do, and that is also what their people owe the pigeons. Berokoff uses Bowlby’s attachment theory in detail to describe
the needs of young pigeons as they mature, and their partners are both
other pigeons and human beings response-able with them. The scene
she describes is not all rosy. Pigeon bullying, the taxing labor of racing
for birds and people, competition for attention and love—and recipes
for cooking some of the pigeons—are all in these posts. My point is not
that this discourse or this sport is innocent, but that here is a scene of
great relational complexity, a vigorous multispecies sf practice.

PigeonBlog
Recuperation and staying with the trouble are the themes of my sf
practice. It is all too possible to address these questions through human
brutality toward pigeons, or indeed through pigeon damage to other
species or to human-built structures. Instead, I want to turn to the differential burdens of urban air pollution that contribute to different rates
of human (and other-than-human, but that is not rated) mortality and
illness, often distributed by race and class. Working pigeons will be our
companions in projects of environmental justice in California that seek
to repair both blighted neighborhoods and social relations. We will stay
with the trouble in the tissues of an art activism project called PigeonBlog. This was a project by artist-researcher Beatriz da Costa with her
students Cina Hazegh and Kevin Ponto; they tied sf patterns with many
human, animal, and cyborg coshapers.
In August 2006, racing pigeons flew as participants in three public
social experiments that intimately joined communication technologies with city people and urban sporting birds. The pigeons flew once
as part of a Seminar in Experimental Critical Theory at the University
of California at Irvine and twice for the festival called Seven Days of
Art and Interconnectivity of the Inter-Society for Electronic Arts in
San Jose, California.23 PigeonBlog required extensive collaboration between “homing pigeons, artists, engineers, and pigeon fanciers engaged
in a grass-roots scientific data gathering initiative designed to collect
and distribute information about air quality conditions to the general
public.”24 Worldwide, racing pigeons are no strangers to alliances with
working-class people in relations of competitive masculine sport and
profound cross-species affection, and their historical capabilities in surveillance and communication technologies and networks are very old
and very important. These pigeons have been workers and subjects in ornithology and psychology research labs for many decades. But sporting
homing pigeons had not, before PigeonBlog, been invited to join all of
that heritage together with another set of players, namely, art activists.
The project sought to join savvy, inexpensive, do-it-yourself electronics with citizen science and interspecies coproduced art and knowledge
“in the pursuit of resistant action.”25 The data were intended to provoke, motivate, amplify, inspire, and illustrate, not to substitute for or
surpass professional air pollution science and monitoring. These were
data produced to generate further imaginative and knowing action in
many domains of practice. Da Costa set out not to become an air pollution scientist, but to spark collaboration in something quite different:
multispecies art in action for mundane worlds in need of—and capable
of—recuperation across consequential differences.
Air pollution is legendary in Southern California, especially Los Angeles County, and it impacts the health of people and other critters especially fiercely near highways, power plants, and refineries. These sites
often cluster in and near the neighborhoods of working-class people,
people of color, and immigrants—hardly mutually exclusive categories.
Official government air pollution monitoring devices in Southern California are placed at fixed points away from high-traffic areas and known
pollution sources and at altitudes higher than the zones in which people
and lots of other plants and animals breathe. Each monitoring device
costs many thousands of dollars and can only measure gases in its immediate vicinity, relying on various models to extrapolate to the volume
of the air basin. Properly equipped racing pigeons can gather continuous
real-time air pollution data while moving through the air at key heights
not accessible to the official instruments, as well as from the ground
where they are released for their homing flights. These data could also
be streamed in real time to the public via the Internet. What would it
take to enlist the cooperation of such birds and their people, and what
kind of caring and response-ability could such a collaboration evoke?
Who would render whom capable of what?
Da Costa explained the equipment: “The pigeon ‘backpack’ developed
for this project consisted of a combined gps (latitude, longitude, altitude) / gsm (cell phone tower communication) unit and corresponding
antennas, a dual automotive co/nox pollution sensor, a temperature
sensor, a Subscriber Identity Module (sim) card interface, a microcontroller and standard supporting electronic components. Designed
in this manner, we essentially ended up developing an open-platform
Short Message Service (sms) enabled cell phone, ready to be rebuilt and
repurposed by anyone who is interested in doing so.”26 The researcherartist-engineers took about three months to design the basic technology, but making the pack small, comfortable, and safe enough for the
pigeons took almost a year of building hands-on multispecies trust and
knowledge essential to joining the birds, technology, and people. No one
wanted an overloaded homing pigeon plucked from the air by an opportunistic falcon that was not a member of the project! Nobody, least of
all the men who bred, raised, handled, and loved their racing pigeons,
would tolerate anxious and unhappy birds lumbering home under duress. The artist-researchers and the pigeon fanciers had to render each
other capable of mutual trust so that they could ask the birds for their
confidence and skill. That meant lots of fitting sessions and pigeon balance training in lofts and lots of learning to learn with a generous and
knowledgeable pigeon fancier, Bob Matsuyama, who was also a middle
school shop and science teacher, and his talented and educated fliers.
The pigeons were not sim cards; they were living coproducers, and the
artist-researchers and pigeons had to learn to interact and to train together with the mentoring of the men of the pigeon fancy. All the players
rendered each other capable; they “became-with” each other in speculative fabulation. Many trials and test flights later, the multispecies team
was ready to trace the air in string figure patterns of electronic tracks.27
There were many press reports and reactions to the 2006 performances and to the PigeonBlog website. Da Costa reported that an engineer from Texas contacted her about coauthoring a grant proposal to
the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency to collaborate in
the development of small autonomous aerial surveillance vehicles designed around the aerodynamics of birds. If only that had been a joke!
But the long military use of other-than-human animals as weapons and
spy systems has only become fancier and more “techy” in the twenty22 c h a p t e r o n e


The PigeonBlog team of human beings, pigeons, and
electronic technologies. Photograph by Deborah Forster for
PigeonBlog. Courtesy of Robert Niediffer, artistic executor
for Beatriz da Costa.

first century.28 In another vein, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (peta) tried to shut PigeonBlog down as abuse of animals. peta
issued a public statement calling on the administration of the University
of California at Irvine, where da Costa was a faculty member, to take
action. The rationale was fascinating: PigeonBlog was not justified in
its use of nonhuman animals because it was not even conducting scientifically grounded experiments, to which peta might also object, but
less so because that at least would have teleological, functional reason
(cure disease, map genomes, etc.) on its side. Art was trivial, mere play
compared to the serious work of expanding subjects of rights or advancing science. Da Costa took seriously questions about the cosmopolitics
and material-semiotics of collaboration for animals in art, politics, or
science. Who renders whom capable of what, and at what price, borne by
whom? But, she asked, “Is human-animal work as part of political [and
art] action less legitimate than the same type of activity when framed
under the umbrella of science?”29 Perhaps it is precisely in the realm
of play, outside the dictates of teleology, settled categories, and func


tion, that serious worldliness and recuperation become possible. That is
surely the premise of sf.
Well before peta noticed da Costa’s art research, racing-pigeon men’s
fear of the kind of controversy and attack that some (not all) parts of
the animal rights movement bring to many organized working/playing
human-animal relationships, including becoming-with pigeons in competitive sport, almost stopped PigeonBlog before it got started.30 In the
early stages of her project, da Costa contacted the American Racing Pigeon Union in an effort to meet pigeon fanciers to see if they and their
pigeons would participate. The first contact person was interested but
frankly afraid of animal rights people and tactics. He referred da Costa
to Bob Matsuyama, who worked with the project extensively and also
helped the art researchers meet pigeon fanciers in San Jose, relaying
earned trust. When PigeonBlog was finished, the American Racing Pigeon Union gave da Costa a formal “Certificate of Appreciation” for the
work she did for the birds and their people by showing a wider public the
accomplishments and capabilities of racing pigeons.
There are lots of fans of PigeonBlog, including green and environmental activists, but one response in particular made da Costa feel that
the racing pigeons of California had flown well, opening up something
promising in the world across species. The Cornell University Laboratory of Ornithology asked da Costa to serve on its board for “Urban Bird
Gardens” as part of the lab’s citizen science initiative. Data collected by
ordinary people, from elderly walkers to schoolchildren, could and did
become part of databases bringing together university research and the
affections and questions of citizens. Consider a closely related Cornelllinked citizen science initiative, Project PigeonWatch, which surveys regional differences in color types in different populations of common feral pigeons. One PigeonWatch project is in Washington, DC, and enlists
city school groups to observe and record urban pigeons. Many things
happen in this work in Terrapolis. City kids, overwhelmingly from “minority” groups, learn to see despised birds as valuable and interesting
city residents, as worth notice. Neither the kids nor the pigeons are
urban “wildlife”; both sets of beings are civic subjects and objects in
intra-action. But I cannot and will not forget that these pigeons and
black kids in DC both carry the marks of U.S. racist iconography as unruly, dirty, out of place, feral. The actual kids move from seeing pigeons
as “rats with wings” to sociable birds with lives and deaths. The kids
transmute from bird hecklers and sometimes physical abusers to astute
observers and advocates of beings whom they had not known how to
see or respect. The schoolchildren became response-able. Perhaps, because pigeons have long histories of affective and cognitive relations
with people, the pigeons looked back at the kids too, and at least the
birds were not heckled. I know this account is a story, an invitation as
much as an accomplishment, but the space for recuperation across despised cross-species categories of city dwellers deserves to be widened,
not shut down.31
Writing of another art project joining homing pigeons and their
people in collaboration in the face of the danger of the loss of the very
community of pigeon fanciers (colombophiles) that nurtures them both,
Vinciane Despret asked what the pigeon loft (pigeonnier) designed by
the artist Matali Crasset at Chaudry, France, in 2003 commemorates:
But without the lover of pigeons (pigeon fancier), without the knowledge and know-how of men and birds, without selection, apprenticeship, without transmission of practices, what then would remain
would be pigeons, but not homing pigeons, not voyageurs. What is
commemorated, then, is not the animal alone, nor the practice alone,
but the activation of two “becomings-with” that are written explicitly into the origin of the project. Otherwise said, what is brought
into existence are the relations by which pigeons transform men into
talented pigeon fanciers and by which the fanciers transform the pigeons into reliable racing pigeons. This is how the work commemorates. It tasks itself with crafting a memory in the sense of prolonging
the achievement into the present. This is a kind of “reprise.”32
To re-member, to com-memorate, is actively to reprise, revive, retake,
recuperate. Committed to the multispecies, sf, string figure worlding
of becoming-with, da Costa and Despret are companion species. They
remember; they entice and prolong into the fleshly present what would
disappear without the active reciprocity of partners. Homing or racing
pigeons and feral pigeons call both their emergent and traditional peoples to response-ability, and vice versa. City dwellers and rural people of
different species and modes of living and dying make each other colombophiles talentueux in company with voyageurs fiables.
Despret and da Costa are playing string figure games with Matali
Crasset, relaying knotted patterns and possibilities in Terrapolis. Crasset is an industrial designer, a profession that requires listening to and
collaborating with partners in ways fine artists need not engage, but

Capsule, designed by Matali Crasset, 2003, for the project of La Fondation
de France. Les nouveaux commanditaires. Médiation-Production: artconnexion.
Lille, France. © André Morin.

which da Costa also practices in her work and play as artist researcher
and multispecies art activist. The pigeon loft Crasset proposed was commissioned by La Défense, the association of pigeon fanciers in Beauvois
en Cambresis, and by La Base de Loisirs de Caudry (the leisure park
of Caudry). The interior space of the capsule is functionally organized
like a tree, a kind of axis of the world, and the exterior shape echoes
old Egyptian designs for pigeon lofts. Historical, mythical, and material
worlds are in play here, in this home for birds commissioned by those
who breed, raise, fly, and become-with them.
Another pigeon loft in the shape of a tower imposes itself on my
memory; another proposal for multispecies recuperation for creatures of
empire is held out to those of whatever species who might grasp it. This
time we are in Melbourne in Australia, in Batman Park along the Yarra
River, part of the Wurundjeri people’s territory prior to European settlement. This colonized area along the Yarra became a wasteland, sewage
dump, and site for cargo and rail transport, destroying the wetlands (Anglo scientific term) and destroying country (Anglo-Aboriginal term for
multidimensional and storied place). Wetlands and country are as alike
and as different as cat’s cradle, jeux de ficelle, na’atl’o’, and matjka-wuma;
for staying with the trouble, the names and patterns are necessary to
each other, but they are not isomorphic.33 They inhabit linked, split, and
tangled histories.
The small Batman Park was established in 1982 along a disused freight
train rail yard, and the pigeon loft was built in the 1990s to encourage
pigeons to roost away from city buildings and streets. The loft is a tower
structure built as part of the city’s management plan for feral pigeons.
These are not the beloved sporting pigeons of fanciers or colombophiles,
but the urban “rats of the sky” we met a few paragraphs ago in a Washington, DC, city parks program tied to the internationally eminent Cornell
University Laboratory of Ornithology. Melbourne’s pigeons came with
Europeans and thrived in the ecosystems and worlds that replaced the
Yarra River wetlands and dispossessed most of the Aboriginal traditional
owners of the land responsible for taking care of country. In 1985, the
Wurundjeri Tribe Land Compensation and Cultural Heritage Council was
established partly to develop awareness of Wurundjeri culture and history within contemporary Australia. I do not know if this council played
any role in the partial recuperation of the land of Batman Park; I do know
that sites along the Yarra River were places of significance to the Wurundjeri. In 1835, businessman and explorer John Batman signed a document
with a group of Wurundjeri elders for the purchase of land in the first and
only documented time that Europeans “negotiated their presence and occupation of Aboriginal lands directly with the traditional owners . . . For
,000 acres of Melbourne, including most of the land now within the
suburban area, John Batman paid 40 pairs of blankets, 42 tomahawks,
 knives, 62 pairs scissors, 40 looking glasses, 250 handkerchiefs,
 shirts, 4 flannel jackets, 4 suits of clothes and 150 lb. of flour.”34 The
British governor of New South Wales repudiated this impudent treaty for
its trespass on the rights of the Crown. Somehow, this fraught history
must be inherited, must be re-membered, in that little park strip of reclaimed urban land with its striking pigeon tower.
Batman Park’s pigeon loft is not art research for citizen science or
industrial design commissioned by the racing-pigeon community, but
a birth control—or, better, hatching control—technology crucial to
multispecies urban flourishing. Feral pigeon fecundity is itself a material urban force, and also a potent signifier of the overfilling of the land
with settlers and immigrants and depriving the land of endemic wetland birds and Aboriginal peoples. Staying with the trouble, the task is
multispecies recuperation and somehow, in that suggestive Australian

Pigeon loft in Batman Park, Melbourne. Photograph by Nick Carson, 2008.

idiom, “getting on together” with less denial and more experimental
justice. I want to see the pigeon loft as a small, practical enactment and
a reminder to further opening to the response-ability of staying with the
trouble. Response-ability is about both absence and presence, killing and
nurturing, living and dying—and remembering who lives and who dies
and how in the string figures of naturalcultural history. The loft has two
hundred nesting boxes for pigeons, inviting them to lay their eggs. People come from below and replace their eggs with artificial ones to brood.
People are allowed—encouraged—to feed pigeons near the loft but not
elsewhere. Pitchfork, a blog dedicated to writing about “projects to do
with permaculture, education, and growing food,” took note of the Batman Park loft not just for its efforts to deal with pigeon-human conflict
in innovative ways, but also for a rich product of concentrated roosting
birds—compostable droppings. The blogger noted suggestively, “The
easiest way to get pigeon manure into your food system is to get the pigeons to fly it in for you.”35 In a park that was a sewage dump not so long
ago, this suggestion from the permaculture world has a definite charm.
This pigeon loft is not a prolife project; in my view, no serious animalhuman becoming-with can be a prolife project in the chilling American
sense of that term. And the municipal pigeon tower certainly cannot
undo unequal treaties, conquest, and wetlands destruction; but it is
nonetheless a possible thread in a pattern for ongoing, noninnocent,
interrogative, multispecies getting on together.
Reliable Voyageurs

Companion species infect each other all the time. Pigeons are world
travelers, and such beings are vectors and carry many more, for good
and for ill. Bodily ethical and political obligations are infectious, or they
should be. Cum panis, companion species, at table together. Why tell stories like my pigeon tales, when there are only more and more openings
and no bottom lines? Because there are quite definite response-abilities
that are strengthened in such stories.
The details matter. The details link actual beings to actual responseabilities. As spies, racers, messengers, urban neighbors, iridescent sexual exhibitionists, avian parents, gender assistants for people, scientific
subjects and objects, art-engineering environmental reporters, searchand-rescue workers at sea, imperialist invaders, discriminators of painting styles, native species, pets, and more, around the earth pigeons and
their partners of many kinds, including people, make history. Each time
a story helps me remember what I thought I knew, or introduces me to
new knowledge, a muscle critical for caring about flourishing gets some
aerobic exercise. Such exercise enhances collective thinking and movement in complexity. Each time I trace a tangle and add a few threads that
at first seemed whimsical but turned out to be essential to the fabric,
I get a bit straighter that staying with the trouble of complex worlding is the name of the game of living and dying well together on terra,
in Terrapolis. We are all responsible to and for shaping conditions for
multispecies flourishing in the face of terrible histories, and sometimes
joyful histories too, but we are not all response-able in the same ways.
The differences matter—in ecologies, economies, species, lives.
If only we could all be so lucky as to have a savvy artist design our
lofts, our homes, our messaging packs! If only we all had the map sense
to navigate in the troubled times and places!

Thinking
Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene

We are all lichens.
—Scott Gilbert, “We Are All Lichens Now”
Think we must. We must think.
—Stengers and Despret, Women Who Make a Fuss

What happens when human exceptionalism and bounded individualism,
those old saws of Western philosophy and political economics, become
unthinkable in the best sciences, whether natural or social? Seriously
unthinkable: not available to think with. Biological sciences have been
especially potent in fermenting notions about all the mortal inhabitants of the earth since the imperializing eighteenth century. Homo
sapiens—the Human as species, the Anthropos as the human species,
Modern Man—was a chief product of these knowledge practices. What
happens when the best biologies of the twenty-first century cannot do
their job with bounded individuals plus contexts, when organisms plus
environments, or genes plus whatever they need, no longer sustain the
overflowing richness of biological knowledges, if they ever did? What
happens when organisms plus environments can hardly be remembered
for the same reasons that even Western-indebted people can no longer
figure themselves as individuals and societies of individuals in human-

only histories? Surely such a transformative time on earth must not be
named the Anthropocene!
In this chapter, with all the unfaithful offspring of the sky gods, with
my littermates who find a rich wallow in multispecies muddles, I want
to make a critical and joyful fuss about these matters. I want to stay
with the trouble, and the only way I know to do that is in generative joy,
terror, and collective thinking.
My first demon familiar in this task will be a spider, Pimoa cthulhu,
who lives under stumps in the redwood forests of Sonoma and Mendocino Counties, near where I live in North Central California.1 Nobody
lives everywhere; everybody lives somewhere. Nothing is connected to
everything; everything is connected to something.2 This spider is in
place, has a place, and yet is named for intriguing travels elsewhere. This
spider will help me with returns, and with roots and routes.3 The eightlegged tentacular arachnid that I appeal to gets her generic name from
the language of the Goshute people of Utah and her specific name from
denizens of the depths, from the abyssal and elemental entities, called
chthonic.4 The chthonic powers of Terra infuse its tissues everywhere,
despite the civilizing efforts of the agents of sky gods to astralize them
and set up chief Singletons and their tame committees of multiples or
subgods, the One and the Many. Making a small change in the biologist’s taxonomic spelling, from cthulhu to chthulu, with renamed Pimoa
chthulu I propose a name for an elsewhere and elsewhen that was, still is,
and might yet be: the Chthulucene. I remember that tentacle comes from
the Latin tentaculum, meaning “feeler,” and tentare, meaning “to feel”
and “to try”; and I know that my leggy spider has many-armed allies.
Myriad tentacles will be needed to tell the story of the Chthulucene.5
The tentacular ones tangle me in sf. Their many appendages make
string figures; they entwine me in the poiesis—the making—of speculative fabulation, science fiction, science fact, speculative feminism, soin de
ficelle, so far. The tentacular ones make attachments and detachments;
they ake cuts and knots; they make a difference; they weave paths and
consequences but not determinisms; they are both open and knotted
in some ways and not others.6 sf is storytelling and fact telling; it is
the patterning of possible worlds and possible times, material-semiotic
worlds, gone, here, and yet to come. I work with string figures as a theoretical trope, a way to think-with a host of companions in sympoietic
threading, felting, tangling, tracking, and sorting. I work with and in
sf as material-semiotic composting, as theory in the mud, as muddle.7
Tentacular Thinking


Pimoa cthulhu. Photograph by Gustavo Hormiga.

The tentacular are not disembodied figures; they are cnidarians, spiders,
fingery beings like humans and raccoons, squid, jellyfish, neural extravaganzas, fibrous entities, flagellated beings, myofibril braids, matted and
felted microbial and fungal tangles, probing creepers, swelling roots,
reaching and climbing tendrilled ones. The tentacular are also nets and
networks, it critters, in and out of clouds. Tentacularity is about life
lived along lines—and such a wealth of lines—not at points, not in
spheres. “The inhabitants of the world, creatures of all kinds, human
and non-human, are wayfarers”; generations are like “a series of interlaced trails.”8 String figures all.
All the tentacular stringy ones have made me unhappy with posthumanism, even as I am nourished by much generative work done under that sign. My partner Rusten Hogness suggested compost instead
of posthuman(ism), as well as humusities instead of humanities, and
I jumped into that wormy pile.9 Human as humus has potential, if we
could chop and shred human as Homo, the detumescing project of a
self-making and planet-destroying ceo. Imagine a conference not on
the Future of the Humanities in the Capitalist Restructuring University,
but instead on the Power of the Humusities for a Habitable Multispecies
Muddle! Ecosexual artists Beth Stephens and Annie Sprinkle made a
bumper sticker for me, for us, for sf: “Composting is so hot!”10


The earth of the ongoing Chthulucene is sympoietic, not autopoietic.
Mortal Worlds (Terra, Earth, Gaia, Chthulu, the myriad names and powers that are not Greek, Latin, or Indo-European at all)11 do not make
themselves, no matter how complex and multileveled the systems, no
matter how much order out of disorder might be produced in generative
autopoietic system breakdowns and relaunchings at higher levels of order. Autopoietic systems are hugely interesting—witness the history of
cybernetics and information sciences; but they are not good models for
living and dying worlds and their critters. Autopoietic systems are not
closed, spherical, deterministic, or teleological; but they are not quite
good enough models for the mortal sf world. Poiesis is symchthonic,
sympoietic, always partnered all the way down, with no starting and
subsequently interacting “units.”12 The Chthulucene does not close in
on itself; it does not round off; its contact zones are ubiquitous and
continuously spin out loopy tendrils. Spider is a much better figure for
sympoiesis than any inadequately leggy vertebrate of whatever pantheon. Tentacularity is symchthonic, wound with abyssal and dreadful
graspings, frayings, and weavings, passing relays again and again, in the
generative recursions that make up living and dying.
After I used the term sympoiesis in a grasp for something other than
the lures of autopoiesis, Katie King told me about M. Beth Dempster’s
Master of Environmental Studies thesis written in 1998, in which she
suggested the term sympoiesis for “collectively-producing systems that
do not have self-defined spatial or temporal boundaries. Information
and control are distributed among components. The systems are evolutionary and have the potential for surprising change.” By contrast,
autopoietic systems are “self-producing” autonomous units “with self
defined spatial or temporal boundaries that tend to be centrally controlled, homeostatic, and predictable.”13 Dempster argued that many
systems are mistaken for autopoietic that are really sympoietic. I think
this point is important for thinking about rehabilitation (making livable again) and sustainability amid the porous tissues and open edges
of damaged but still ongoing living worlds, like the planet earth and its
denizens in current times being called the Anthropocene. If it is true
that neither biology nor philosophy any longer supports the notion
of independent organisms in environments, that is, interacting units
plus contexts/rules, then sympoiesis is the name of the game in spades.
Bounded (or neoliberal) individualism amended by autopoiesis is not
good enough figurally or scientifically; it misleads us down deadly paths.
Tentacular Thinking

Barad’s agential realism and intra-action become common sense, and
perhaps a lifeline for Terran wayfarers.
sf, string figuring, is sympoietic. Thinking-with my work on cat’s cradle, as well as with the work of another of her companions in thinking,
Félix Guattari, Isabelle Stengers relayed back to me how players pass
back and forth to each other the patterns-at-stake, sometimes conserving, sometimes proposing and inventing.
More precisely, com-menting, if it means thinking-with, that is
becoming-with, is in itself a way of relaying . . . But knowing that what
you take has been held out entails a particular thinking “between.”
It does not demand fidelity, still less fealty, rather a particular kind
of loyalty, the answer to the trust of the held out hand. Even if this
trust is not in “you” but in “creative uncertainty,” even if the consequences and meaning of what has been done, thought or written, do
not belong to you anymore than they belonged to the one you take
the relay from, one way or another the relay is now in your hands,
together with the demand that you do not proceed with “mechanical
confidence.” [In cat’s cradling, at least] two pairs of hands are needed,
and in each successive step, one is “passive,” offering the result of its
previous operation, a string entanglement, for the other to operate,
only to become active again at the next step, when the other presents
the new entanglement. But it can also be said that each time the “passive” pair is the one that holds, and is held by the entanglement, only
to “let it go” when the other one takes the relay.14
In passion and action, detachment and attachment, this is what I call
cultivating response-ability; that is also collective knowing and doing,
an ecology of practices. Whether we asked for it or not, the pattern is in
our hands. The answer to the trust of the held-out hand: think we must.
Marilyn Strathern is an ethnographer of thinking practices. She defines anthropology as studying relations with relations—a hugely consequential, mind- and body-altering sort of commitment.15 Nourished
by her lifelong work in highland Papua New Guinea (Mt. Hagen), Strathern writes about accepting the risk of relentless contingency, of putting
relations at risk with other relations, from unexpected worlds. Embodying the practice of feminist speculative fabulation in the scholarly mode,
Strathern taught me—taught us—a simple but game-changing thing:
“It matters what ideas we use to think other ideas.”16 I compost my soul
in this hot pile. The worms are not human; their undulating bodies in34




Cat’s Cradle / String Theory, Baila Goldenthal, 2008. Oil on canvas, 36 = 48 in.
Courtesy of Maurya Simon and Tamara Ambroson.

gest and reach, and their feces fertilize worlds. Their tentacles make
string figures.
It matters what thoughts think thoughts. It matters what knowledges know knowledges. It matters what relations relate relations. It
matters what worlds world worlds. It matters what stories tell stories.
Paintings by Baila Goldenthal are eloquent testimony to this mattering.17
What is it to surrender the capacity to think? These times called the
Anthropocene are times of multispecies, including human, urgency: of
great mass death and extinction; of onrushing disasters, whose unpredictable specificities are foolishly taken as unknowability itself; of refusing to know and to cultivate the capacity of response-ability; of refusing
to be present in and to onrushing catastrophe in time; of unprecedented
looking away. Surely, to say “unprecedented” in view of the realities of
the last centuries is to say something almost unimaginable. How can we
think in times of urgencies without the self-indulgent and self-fulfilling
myths of apocalypse, when every fiber of our being is interlaced, even
complicit, in the webs of processes that must somehow be engaged and
repatterned? Recursively, whether we asked for it or not, the pattern
Tentacular Thinking

is in our hands. The answer to the trust of the held-out hand: think
we must.
Instructed by Valerie Hartouni, I turn to Hannah Arendt’s analysis
of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann’s inability to think. In that
surrender of thinking lay the “banality of evil” of the particular sort
that could make the disaster of the Anthropocene, with its ramped-up
genocides and speciescides, come true.18 This outcome is still at stake;
think we must; we must think! In Hartouni’s reading, Arendt insisted
that thought was profoundly different from what we might call disciplinary knowledge or science rooted in evidence, or the sorting of truth
and belief or fact and opinion or good and bad. Thinking, in Arendt’s
sense, is not a process for evaluating information and argument, for
being right or wrong, for judging oneself or others to be in truth or error.
All of that is important, but not what Arendt had to say about the evil
of thoughtlessness that I want to bring into the question of the geohistorical conjuncture being called the Anthropocene.
Arendt witnessed in Eichmann not an incomprehensible monster, but
something much more terrifying—she saw commonplace thoughtlessness. That is, here was a human being unable to make present to himself
what was absent, what was not himself, what the world in its sheer notone-selfness is and what claims-to-be inhere in not-oneself. Here was
someone who could not be a wayfarer, could not entangle, could not
track the lines of living and dying, could not cultivate response-ability,
could not make present to itself what it is doing, could not live in consequences or with consequence, could not compost. Function mattered,
duty mattered, but the world did not matter for Eichmann. The world
does not matter in ordinary thoughtlessness. The hollowed-out spaces
are all filled with assessing information, determining friends and enemies, and doing busy jobs; negativity, the hollowing out of such positivity, is missed, an astonishing abandonment of thinking.19 This quality
was not an emotional lack, a lack of compassion, although surely that
was true of Eichmann, but a deeper surrender to what I would call immateriality, inconsequentiality, or, in Arendt’s and also my idiom, thoughtlessness. Eichmann was astralized right out of the muddle of thinking
into the practice of business as usual no matter what. There was no way
the world could become for Eichmann and his heirs—us?—a “matter of
care.”20 The result was active participation in genocide.
The anthropologist, feminist, cultural theorist, storyteller, and connoisseur of the tissues of heterogeneous capitalism, globalism, travel36



ing worlds, and local places Anna Tsing examines the “arts of living on
a damaged planet,”21 or, in the subtitle of her book, “the possibility of
life in Capitalist ruins.” She performs thinking of a kind that must be
cultivated in the all-too-ordinary urgencies of onrushing multispecies
extinctions, genocides, immiserations, and exterminations. I name these
things urgencies rather than emergencies because the latter word connotes something approaching apocalypse and its mythologies. Urgencies have other temporalities, and these times are ours. These are the
times we must think; these are the times of urgencies that need stories.
Following matsutake mushrooms in their fulminating assemblages of
Japanese, Americans, Chinese, Koreans, Hmong, Lao, Mexicans, fungal
spores and mats, oak and pine trees, mycorrhizal symbioses, pickers,
buyers, shippers, restaurateurs, diners, businessmen, scientists, foresters, dna sequencers and their changing species, and much more, Tsing
practices sympoietics in edgy times. Refusing either to look away or to
reduce the earth’s urgency to an abstract system of causative destruction,
such as a Human Species Act or undifferentiated Capitalism, Tsing argues that precarity—failure of the lying promises of Modern Progress—
characterizes the lives and deaths of all terran critters in these times.
She looks for the eruptions of unexpected liveliness and the contaminated and nondeterministic, unfinished, ongoing practices of living in
the ruins. She performs the force of stories; she shows in the flesh how
it matters which stories tell stories as a practice of caring and thinking.
“If a rush of troubled stories is the best way to tell contaminated diversity, then it’s time to make that rush part of our knowledge practices . . .
Matsutake’s willingness to emerge in blasted landscapes allows us to
explore the ruins that have become our collective home. To follow matsutake guides us to possibilities of coexistence within environmental
disturbance. This is not an excuse for further human damage. Still, matsutake show one kind of collaborative survival.”
Driven by radical curiosity, Tsing does the ethnography of “salvage accumulation” and “patchy capitalism,” the kind that can no longer promise progress but can and does extend devastation and make precarity
the name of our systematicity. There is no simple ethical, political, or
theoretical point to take from Tsing’s work; there is instead the force
of engaging the world in the kind of thinking practices impossible for
Eichmann’s heirs. “Matsutake tell us about surviving collaboratively
in disturbance and contamination. We need this skill for living in ruins.”22 This is not a longing for salvation or some other sort of optimistic
Tentacular Thinking

politics; neither is it a cynical quietism in the face of the depth of the
trouble. Rather, Tsing proposes a commitment to living and dying with
response-ability in unexpected company. Such living and dying have the
best chance of cultivating conditions for ongoingness.
The ecological philosopher and multispecies ethnographer Thom van
Dooren also inhabits the layered complexities of living in times of extinction, extermination, and partial recuperation; he deepens our consideration of what thinking means, of what not becoming thoughtless
exacts from all of us. In his extraordinary book Flight Ways, van Dooren
accompanies situated bird species living on the extended edge of extinction, asking what it means to hold open space for another.23 Such holding open is far from an innocent or obvious material or ethical practice;
even when successful, it exacts tolls of suffering as well as surviving
as individuals and as kinds. In his examination of the practices of the
North American whooping crane species survival plan, for example, van
Dooren details multiple kinds of hard multispecies captivities and labors,
forced life, surrogate reproductive labor, and substitute dying—none
of which should be forgotten, especially in successful projects. Holding
open space might—or might not—delay extinction in ways that make
possible composing or recomposing flourishing naturalcultural assemblages. Flight Ways shows how extinction is not a point, not a single
event, but more like an extended edge or a widened ledge. Extinction is
a protracted slow death that unravels great tissues of ways of going on
in the world for many species, including historically situated people.24
Van Dooren proposes that mourning is intrinsic to cultivating
response-ability. In his 
conservation efforts for Hawaiian
crows (‘Alalā for Hawaiians, Corvus hawaiiensis for Linneans), whose
forest homes and foods as well as friends, chicks, and mates have largely
disappeared, van Dooren argues that it is not just human people who
mourn the loss of loved ones, of place, of lifeways; other beings mourn
as well. Corvids grieve loss. The point rests on biobehavioral studies as
well as intimate natural history; neither the capacity nor the practice of
mourning is a human specialty. Outside the dubious privileges of human
exceptionalism, thinking people must learn to grieve-with.
Mourning is about dwelling with a loss and so coming to appreciate
what it means, how the world has changed, and how we must ourselves
change and renew our relationships if we are to move forward from
here. In this context, genuine mourning should open us into an aware38



ness of our dependence on and relationships with those countless others being driven over the edge of extinction . . . The reality, however, is
that there is no avoiding the necessity of the difficult cultural work of
reflection and mourning. This work is not opposed to practical action,
rather it is the foundation of any sustainable and informed response.
Grief is a path to understanding entangled shared living and dying;
human beings must grieve with, because we are in and of this fabric of
undoing. Without sustained remembrance, we cannot learn to live with
ghosts and so cannot think. Like the crows and with the crows, living
and dead “we are at stake in each other’s company.”25
At least one more sf thread is crucial to the practice of thinking, which
must be thinking-with: storytelling. It matters what thoughts think
thoughts; it matters what stories tell stories. “Urban Penguins: Stories
for Lost Places,” van Dooren’s 
Sydney Harbor’s Little Penguins
(Eudyptula minor), succeeds in crafting a nonanthropomorphic, nonanthropocentric sense of storied place. In their resolutely “philopatric”
(home loving) nesting and other life practices, these urban penguins—
real, particular birds—story place, this place, not just any place. Establishing the reality and vivid specificity of penguin-storied place is a
major material-semiotic accomplishment. Storying cannot any longer
be put into the box of human exceptionalism. Without deserting the
terrain of behavioral ecology and natural history, this writing achieves
powerful attunement to storying in penguin multimodal semiotics.26
Ursula Le Guin taught me the carrier bag theory of storytelling and
of naturalcultural history. Her theories, her stories, are capacious bags
for collecting, carrying, and telling the stuff of living. “A leaf a gourd a
shell a net a bag a sling a sack a bottle a pot a box a container. A holder.
A recipient.”27 So much of earth history has been told in the thrall of the
fantasy of the first beautiful words and weapons, of the first beautiful
weapons as words and vice versa. Tool, weapon, word: that is the word
made flesh in the image of the sky god; that is the Anthropos. In a tragic
story with only one real actor, one real world-maker, the hero, this is
the Man-making tale of the hunter on a quest to kill and bring back the
terrible bounty. This is the cutting, sharp, combative tale of action that
defers the suffering of glutinous, earth-rotted passivity beyond bearing.
All others in the prick tale are props, ground, plot space, or prey. They
don’t matter; their job is to be in the way, to be overcome, to be the
road, the conduit, but not the traveler, not the begetter. The last thing
Tentacular Thinking

the hero wants to know is that his beautiful words and weapons will be
worthless without a bag, a container, a net.
Nonetheless, no adventurer should leave home without a sack. How
did a sling, a pot, a bottle suddenly get in the story? How do such lowly
things keep the story going? Or maybe even worse for the hero, how
do those concave, hollowed-out things, those holes in Being, from the
get-go generate richer, quirkier, fuller, unfitting, ongoing stories, stories
with room for the hunter but which weren’t and aren’t about him, the
self-making human, the human-making machine of history? The slight
curve of the shell that holds just a little water, just a few seeds to give
away and to receive, suggests stories of becoming-with, of reciprocal
induction, of companion species whose job in living and dying is not
to end the storying, the worlding. With a shell and a net, becoming human, becoming humus, becoming terran, has another shape—that is,
the side-winding, snaky shape of becoming-with. To think-with is to
stay with the naturalcultural multispecies trouble on earth. There are no
guarantees, no arrow of time, no Law of History or Science or Nature in
such struggles. There is only the relentlessly contingent sf worlding of
living and dying, of becoming-with and unbecoming-with, of sympoiesis, and so, just possibly, of multispecies flourishing on earth.
Like Le Guin, Bruno Latour passionately understands the need to
change the story, to learn somehow to narrate—to think—outside the
prick tale of Humans in History, when the knowledge of how to murder
each other—and along with each other, uncountable multitudes of the
living earth—is not scarce. Think we must; we must think. That means,
simply, we must change the story; the story must change. Le Guin writes,
“Hence it is with a certain feeling of urgency that I seek the nature, subject, words of the other story, the untold one, the life story.”28 In this
terrible time called the Anthropocene, Latour argues that the fundamentals of geopolitics have been blasted open. None of the parties in
crisis can call on Providence, History, Science, Progress, or any other
god trick outside the common fray to resolve the troubles.29 A common
livable world must be composed, bit by bit, or not at all. What used to
be called nature has erupted into ordinary human affairs, and vice versa,
in such a way and with such permanence as to change fundamentally
means and prospects for going on, including going on at all. Searching
for compositionist practices capable of building effective new collectives,
Latour argues that we must learn to tell “Gaïa stories.” If that word is
too hard, then we can call our narrations “geostories,” in which “all the


former props and passive agents have become active without, for that,
being part of a giant plot written by some overseeing entity.”30 Those
who tell Gaia stories or geostories are the “Earthbound,” those who eschew the dubious pleasures of transcendent plots of modernity and the
purifying division of society and nature. Latour argues that we face a
stark divide: “Some are readying themselves to live as Earthbound in the
Anthropocene; others decided to remain as Humans in the Holocene.”31
In much of his writing, Latour develops the language and imagery of
trials of strength; and in thinking about the Anthropocene and the Earthbound, he extends that metaphor to develop the difference between a
police action, where peace is restored by an already existing order, and
war or politics, where real enemies must be overcome to establish what
will be. Latour is determined to avoid the idols of a ready-to-hand fix,
such as Laws of History, Modernity, the State, God, Progress, Reason,
Decadence, Nature, Technology, or Science, as well as the debilitating
disrespect for difference and shared finitude inherent in those who already know the answers toward those who only need to learn them—by
force, faith, or self-certain pedagogy. Those who “believe” they have the
answers to the present urgencies are terribly dangerous. Those who refuse to be for some ways of living and dying and not others are equally
dangerous. Matters of fact, matters of concern,32 and matters of care are
knotted in string figures, in sf.
Latour embraces sciences, not Science. In geopolitics, “the important
point here is to realize that the facts of the matter cannot be delegated to
a higher unified authority that would have done the choice in our stead.
Controversies—no matter how spurious they might be—are no excuse
to delay the decision about which side represents our world better.”33 Latour aligns himself with the reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (ipcc); he does not believe its assessments and reports;
he decides what is strong and trustworthy and what is not. He casts his
lot with some worlds and worldings and not others. One need not hear
Latour’s “decision” discourse with an individualist ear; he is a compositionist intent on understanding how a common world, how collectives,
are built-with each other, where all the builders are not human beings.
This is neither relativism nor rationalism; it is sf, which Latour would
call both sciences and scientifiction and I would call both sciences and
speculative fabulation—all of which are political sciences, in our aligned
approaches.
“Alignment” is a rich metaphor for wayfarers, for the Earthbound,
Tentacular Thinking

and does not as easily as “decision” carry the tones of modernist liberal
choice discourse, at least in the United States. Further, the refusal of the
modernist category of belief is also crucial to my effort to persuade us
to take up the Chthulucene and its tentacular tasks.34 Like Stengers and
like myself, Latour is a thoroughgoing materialist committed to an ecology of practices, to the mundane articulating of assemblages through
situated work and play in the muddle of messy living and dying. Actual
players, articulating with varied allies of all ontological sorts (molecules,
colleagues, and much more), must compose and sustain what is and will
be. Alignment in tentacular worlding must be a seriously tangled affair!
Intent on the crucial refusal of self-certainty and preexisting god
tricks, which I passionately share, Latour turns to a resource—relentless
reliance on the material-semiotic trope of trials of strength—that, I
think, makes it unnecessarily hard to tell his and our needed new story.
He defines war as the absence of a referee so that trials of strength must
determine the legitimate authority. Humans in History and the Earthbound in the Anthropocene are engaged in trials of strength where there
is no Referee who/which can establish what is/was/will be. History versus Gaia stories are at stake. Those trials—the war of the Earthbound
with the Humans—would not be conducted with rockets and bombs;
they would be conducted with every other imaginable resource and with
no god trick from above to decide life and death, truth and error. But
still, we are in the story of the hero and the first beautiful words and
weapons, not in the story of the carrier bag. Anything not decided in the
presence of the Authority is war; Science (singular and capitalized) is the
Authority; the Authority conducts police actions. In contrast, sciences
(always rooted in practices) are war. Therefore, in Latour’s passionate
speculative fabulation, such war is our only hope for real politics. The
past is as much the contested zone as the present or future.
Latour’s thinking and stories need a specific kind of enemies. He
draws on Carl Schmitt’s “political theology,” which is a theory of peace
through war, with the enemy as hostis, with all its tones of host, hostage, guest, and worthy enemy. Only with such an enemy, Schmitt and
Latour hold, is there respect and a chance to be less, not more, deadly
in conflict. Those who operate within the categories of Authority and of
belief are notoriously prone to exterminationist and genocidal combat
(it’s hard to deny that!). They are lost without a pre-established Referee. The hostis demands much better. But all the action remains within
the narrative vise of trials of strength, of mortal combat, within which


the knowledge of how to murder each other remains well entrenched.
Latour makes clear that he does not want this story, but he does not
propose another. The only real possibility for peace lies in the tale of
the respected enemy, the hostis, and trials of strength. “But when you
are at war, it is only through the throes of the encounters that the authority you have or don’t have will be decided depending whether you win
or lose.”35
Schmitt’s enemies do not allow the story to change in its marrow; the
Earthbound need a more tentacular, less binary life story. Latour’s Gaia
stories deserve better companions in storytelling than Schmitt. The
question of whom to think-with is immensely material. I do not think
Latour’s dilemma can be resolved in the terms of the Anthropocene. His
Earthbound will have to trek into the Chthulucene to entangle with the
ongoing, snaky, unheroic, tentacular, dreadful ones, the ones which/who
craft material-semiotic netbags of little use in trials of strength but of
great use in bringing home and sharing the means of living and dying
well, perhaps even the means of ecological recuperation for human and
more-than-human critters alike.
Shaping her thinking about the times called Anthropocene and
“multi-faced Gaïa” (Stengers’s term) in companionable friction with
Latour, Isabelle Stengers does not ask that we recompose ourselves to
become able, perhaps, to “face Gaïa.” But like Latour and even more like
Le Guin, one of her most generative sf writers, Stengers is adamant
about changing the story. Focusing on intrusion rather than composition, Stengers calls Gaia a fearful and devastating power that intrudes on
our categories of thought, that intrudes on thinking itself.36 Earth/Gaia
is maker and destroyer, not resource to be exploited or ward to be protected or nursing mother promising nourishment. Gaia is not a person
but complex systemic phenomena that compose a living planet. Gaia’s
intrusion into our affairs is a radically materialist event that collects up
multitudes. This intrusion threatens not life on earth itself—microbes
will adapt, to put it mildly—but threatens the livability of earth for vast
kinds, species, assemblages, and individuals in an “event” already under
way called the Sixth Great Extinction.37
Stengers, like Latour, evokes the name of Gaia in the way James
Lovelock and Lynn Margulis did, to name complex nonlinear couplings
between processes that compose and sustain entwined but nonadditive
subsystems as a partially cohering systemic whole.38 In this hypothesis,
Gaia is autopoietic—self-forming, boundary maintaining, contingent,
Tentacular Thinking

dynamic, and stable under some conditions but not others. Gaia is not
reducible to the sum of its parts, but achieves finite systemic coherence
in the face of perturbations within parameters that are themselves responsive to dynamic systemic processes. Gaia does not and could not
care about human or other biological beings’ intentions or desires or
needs, but Gaia puts into question our very existence, we who have provoked its brutal mutation that threatens both human and nonhuman
livable presents and futures. Gaia is not about a list of questions waiting
for rational policies;39 Gaia is an intrusive event that undoes thinking as
usual. “She is what specifically questions the tales and refrains of modern history. There is only one real mystery at stake, here: it is the answer
we, meaning those who belong to this history, may be able to create as
we face the consequences of what we have provoked.”40
Anthropocene

So, what have we provoked? Writing in the midst of California’s historic
multiyear drought and the explosive fire season of 2015, I need the photograph of a fire set deliberately in June 2009 by Sustainable Resource
Alberta near the Saskatchewan River Crossing on the Icefields Parkway
in order to stem the spread of mountain pine beetles, to create a fire
barrier to future fires, and to enhance biodiversity. The hope is that this
fire acts as an ally for resurgence. The devastating spread of the pine
beetle across the North American West is a major 
climate
change in the Anthropocene. So too are the predicted megadroughts and
the extreme and extended fire seasons. Fire in the North American West
has a complicated multispecies history; fire is an essential element for
ongoing, as well as an agent of double death, the killing of ongoingness.
The material semiotics of fire in our times are at stake.
Thus it is past time to turn directly to the time-space-global thing
called Anthropocene.41 The term seems to have been coined in the early
s by University of Michigan ecologist Eugene Stoermer (d. 2012),
an expert in freshwater diatoms. He introduced the term to refer to
growing evidence for the transformative effects of human activities on
the earth. The name Anthropocene made a dramatic star appearance
in globalizing discourses in 2000 when the Dutch Nobel Prize–winning
atmospheric chemist Paul Crutzen joined Stoermer to propose that human activities had been of such a kind and magnitude as to merit the
use of a new geological term for a new epoch, superseding the Holocene,



Icon for the Anthropocene: Flaming Forests. From Rocky Mountain House,
Alberta, Canada, June 2, 2009. Photograph by Cameron Strandberg.

which dated from the end of the last ice age, or the end of the Pleistocene, about twelve thousand years ago. Anthropogenic changes signaled
by the mid-eighteenth-century steam engine and the planet-changing
exploding use of coal were evident in the airs, waters, and rocks.42 Evidence was mounting that the acidification and warming of the oceans
are rapidly decomposing coral reef ecosystems, resulting in huge ghostly
white skeletons of bleached and dead or dying coral. That a symbiotic
system—coral, with its watery world-making associations of cnidarians
and zooanthellae with many other critters too—indicated such a global
transformation will come back into our story.
But for now, notice that the Anthropocene obtained purchase in popular and scientific discourse in the context of ubiquitous urgent efforts
to find ways of talking about, theorizing, modeling, and managing a
Big Thing called Globalization. Climate-change modeling is a powerful
positive feedback loop provoking change-of-state in systems of political
and ecological discourses.43 That Paul Crutzen was both a Nobel laureate
and an atmospheric chemist mattered. By 2008, many scientists around
the world had adopted the not-yet-official but increasingly indispensable term;44 and myriad research projects, performances, installations,
and conferences in the arts, social sciences, and humanities found the
Tentacular Thinking

term mandatory in their naming and thinking, not least for facing both
accelerating extinctions across all biological taxa and also multispecies,
including human, immiseration across the expanse of Terra. Fossilburning human beings seem intent on making as many new fossils as
possible as fast as possible. They will be read in the strata of the rocks
on the land and under the waters by the geologists of the very near future, if not already. Perhaps, instead of the fiery forest, the icon for the
Anthropocene should be Burning Man!45
The scale of burning ambitions of fossil-making man—of this Anthropos whose hot projects for accelerating extinctions merits a name
for a geological epoch—is hard to comprehend. Leaving aside all the
other accelerating extractions of minerals, plant and animal flesh, human homelands, and so on, surely, we want to say, the pace of development of renewable energy technologies and of political and technical
carbon pollution-abatement measures, in the face of palpable and costly
ecosystem collapses and spreading political disorders, will mitigate, if
not eliminate, the burden of planet-warming excess carbon from burning still more fossil fuels. Or, maybe the financial troubles of the global
coal and oil industries by 2015 would stop the madness. Not so. Even
casual acquaintance with the daily news erodes such hopes, but the trouble is worse than what even a close reader of ipcc documents and the
press will find. In “The Third Carbon Age,” Michael Klare, a professor of
Peace and World Security Studies at Hampshire College, lays out strong
evidence against the idea that the old age of coal, replaced by the recent
age of oil, will be replaced by the age of renewables.46 He details the large
and growing global national and corporate investments in renewables;
clearly, there are big profit and power advantages to be had in this sector.
And at the same time, every imaginable, and many unimaginable, technologies and strategic measures are being pursued by all the big global
players to extract every last calorie of fossil carbon, at whatever depth
and in whatever formations of sand, mud, or rock, and with whatever
horrors of travel to distribution and use points, to burn before someone
else gets at that calorie and burns it first in the great prick story of the
first and the last beautiful words and weapons.47 In what he calls the Age
of Unconventional Oil and Gas, hydro-fracking is the tip of the (melting)
iceberg. Melting of the polar seas, terrible for polar bears and for coastal
peoples, is very good for big competitive military, exploration, drilling,
and tanker shipping across the northern passages. Who needs an icebreaker when you can count on melting ice?48


A complex systems engineer named Brad Werner addressed a session
at the meetings of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco
in 2012. His point was quite simple: scientifically speaking, global capitalism “has made the depletion of resources so rapid, convenient and
barrier-free that ‘earth-human systems’ are becoming dangerously unstable in response.” Therefore, he argued, the only scientific thing to do
is revolt! Movements, not just individuals, are critical. What is required
is action and thinking that do not fit within the dominant capitalist culture; and, said Werner, this is a matter not of opinion, but of geophysical
dynamics. The reporter who covered this session summed up Werner’s
address: “He is saying that his research shows that our entire economic
paradigm is a threat to ecological stability.”49 Werner is not the first or
the last researcher and maker of matters of concern to argue this point,
but his clarity at a scientific meeting is bracing. Revolt! Think we must;
we must think. Actually think, not like Eichmann the Thoughtless. Of
course, the devil is in the details—how to revolt? How to matter and not
just want to matter?
Capitalocene

But at least one thing is crystal clear. No matter how much he might be
caught in the generic masculine universal and how much he only looks
up, the Anthropos did not do this fracking thing and he should not name
this double-death-loving epoch. The Anthropos is not Burning Man after all. But because the word is already well entrenched and seems less
controversial to many important players compared to the Capitalocene,
I know that we will continue to need the term Anthropocene. I will use it
too, sparingly; what and whom the Anthropocene collects in its refurbished netbag might prove potent for living in the ruins and even for
modest terran recuperation.
Still, if we could only have one word for these sf times, surely it must
be the Capitalocene.50 Species Man did not shape the conditions for the
Third Carbon Age or the Nuclear Age. The story of Species Man as the
agent of the Anthropocene is an almost laughable rerun of the great
phallic humanizing and modernizing Adventure, where man, made in
the image of a vanished god, takes on superpowers in his secular-sacred
ascent, only to end in tragic detumescence, once again. Autopoietic, selfmaking man came down once again, this time in tragic system failure,
turning biodiverse ecosystems into flipped-out deserts of slimy mats
Tentacular Thinking


Icon for the Capitalocene: Sea Ice Clearing from the Northwest Passage,
Data 2012. NASA Visible Earth image by Jesse Allen, 2015, using data from
the Land Atmosphere Near Real-Time Capability for EOS (LANCE). National Snow
and Ice Data Center.

and stinging jellyfish. Neither did technological determinism produce
the Third Carbon Age. Coal and the steam engine did not determine
the story, and besides the dates are all wrong, not because one has to go
back to the last ice age, but because one has to at least include the great
market and commodity reworldings of the long sixteenth and seventeenth centuries of the current era, even if we think (wrongly) that we
can remain Euro-centered in thinking about “globalizing” transformations shaping the Capitalocene.51 One must surely tell of the networks of
sugar, precious metals, plantations, indigenous genocides, and slavery,
with their labor innovations and relocations and recompositions of critters and things sweeping up both human and nonhuman workers of all
kinds. The infectious industrial revolution of England mattered hugely,
but it is only one player in planet-transforming, historically situated,
new enough, worlding relations. The relocation of peoples, plants, and
animals; the leveling of vast forests; and the violent mining of metals
preceded the steam engine; but that is not a warrant for wringing one’s
hands about the perfidy of the Anthropos, or of Species Man, or of Man
the Hunter.


The systemic stories of the linked metabolisms, articulations, or
coproductions (pick your metaphor) of economies and ecologies, of
histories and human and nonhuman critters, must be relentlessly opportunistic and contingent. They must also be relentlessly relational,
sympoietic, and consequential.52 They are terran, not cosmic or blissed
or cursed into outer space. The Capitalocene is terran; it does not have
to be the last biodiverse geological epoch that includes our species too.
There are so many good stories yet to tell, so many netbags yet to string,
and not just by human beings.
As a provocation, let me summarize my objections to the Anthropocene as a tool, story, or epoch to think with: (1) The myth system associated with the Anthropos is a setup, and the stories end badly. More to
the point, they end in double death; they are not about ongoingness. It
is hard to tell a good story with such a bad actor. Bad actors need a story,
but not the whole story. (2) Species Man does not make history. (3) Man
plus Tool does not make history. That is the story of History human
exceptionalists tell. (4) That History must give way to geostories, to Gaia
stories, to symchthonic stories; terrans do webbed, braided, and tentacular living and dying in sympoietic multispecies string figures; they do
not do History. (5) The human social apparatus of the Anthropocene
tends to be top-heavy and bureaucracy prone. Revolt needs other forms
of action and other stories for solace, inspiration, and effectiveness. (6)
Despite its reliance on agile computer modeling and autopoietic systems
theories, the Anthropocene relies too much on what should be an “unthinkable” theory of relations, namely the old one of bounded utilitarian
individualism—preexisting units in competition relations that take up
all the air in the atmosphere (except, apparently, carbon dioxide). (7)
The sciences of the Anthropocene are too much contained within restrictive systems theories and within evolutionary theories called the
Modern Synthesis, which for all their extraordinary importance have
proven unable to think well about sympoiesis, symbiosis, symbiogenesis, development, webbed ecologies, and microbes. That’s a lot of trouble
for adequate evolutionary theory.(8) Anthropocene is a term most easily
meaningful and usable by intellectuals in wealthy classes and regions; it
is not an idiomatic term for climate, weather, land, care of country, or
much else in great swathes of the world, especially but not only among
indigenous peoples.
I am aligned with feminist environmentalist Eileen Crist when she
writes against the managerial, technocratic, market-and-profit besotted,
Tentacular Thinking

modernizing, and human-exceptionalist business-as-usual commitments
of so much Anthropocene discourse. This discourse is not simply wrongheaded and wrong-hearted in itself; it also saps our capacity for imagining and caring for other worlds, both those that exist precariously now
(including those called wilderness, for all the contaminated history of
that term in racist settler colonialism) and those we need to bring into
being in alliance with other critters, for still possible recuperating pasts,
presents, and futures. “Scarcity’s deepening persistence, and the suffering it is auguring for all life, is an artifact of human exceptionalism at
every level.” Instead, a humanity with more earthly integrity “invites the
priority of our pulling back and scaling down, of welcoming limitations
of our numbers, economies, and habitats for the sake of a higher, more
inclusive freedom and quality of life.”53
If Humans live in History and the Earthbound take up their task
within the Anthropocene, too many Posthumans (and posthumanists,
another gathering altogether) seem to have emigrated to the Anthropocene for my taste. Perhaps my human and nonhuman people are the
dreadful Chthonic ones who snake within the tissues of Terrapolis.
Note that insofar as the Capitalocene is told in the idiom of fundamentalist Marxism, with all its trappings of Modernity, Progress, and
History, that term is subject to the same or fiercer criticisms. The stories
of both the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene teeter constantly on the
brink of becoming much Too Big. Marx did better than that, as did Darwin. We can inherit their bravery and capacity to tell big-enough stories
without determinism, teleology, and plan.54
Historically situated relational worldings make a mockery both of the
binary division of nature and society and of our enslavement to Progress and its evil twin, Modernization. The Capitalocene was relationally made, and not by a secular godlike anthropos, a law of history, the
machine itself, or a demon called Modernity. The Capitalocene must
be relationally unmade in order to compose in material-semiotic sf patterns and stories something more livable, something Ursula K. Le Guin
could be proud of. Shocked anew by our—billions of earth habitants’,
including your and my—ongoing daily assent in practice to this thing
called capitalism, Philippe Pignarre and Isabelle Stengers note that denunciation has been singularly ineffective, or capitalism would have long
ago vanished from the earth. A dark bewitched commitment to the lure
of Progress (and its polar opposite) lashes us to endless infernal alternatives, as if we had no other ways to reworld, reimagine, relive, and



Octopi Wall Street: Symchthonic revolt. Art by Marley Jarvis, Laurel Hiebert,
Kira Treibergs, 2011. Oregon Institute of Marine Biology.

reconnect with each other, in multispecies well-being. This explication
does not excuse us from doing many important things better; quite the
opposite. Pignarre and Stengers affirm on-the-ground collectives capable of inventing new practices of imagination, resistance, revolt, repair,
and mourning, and of living and dying well. They remind us that the
established disorder is not necessary; another world is not only urgently
needed, it is possible, but not if we are ensorcelled in despair, cynicism,
or optimism, and the belief/disbelief discourse of Progress.55 Many
Marxist critical and cultural theorists, at their best, would agree.56 So
would the tentacular ones.57
Chthulucene

Reaching back to generative complex systems approaches by Lovelock
and Margulis, Gaia figures the Anthropocene for many contemporary
Western thinkers. But an unfurling Gaia is better situated in the Chthulucene, an ongoing temporality that resists figuration and dating and
demands myriad names. Arising from Chaos,58 Gaia was and is a powerTentacular Thinking

ful intrusive force, in no one’s pocket, no one’s hope for salvation, capable of provoking the late twentieth century’s best autopoietic complex
systems thinking that led to recognizing the devastation caused by anthropogenic processes of the last few centuries, a necessary counter to
the Euclidean figures and stories of Man.59 Brazilian anthropologists and
philosophers Eduardo Viveiros de Castro and Déborah Danowski exorcise lingering notions that Gaia is confined to the ancient Greeks and
subsequent Eurocultures in their refiguring the urgencies of our times
in the post-Eurocentric conference “The Thousand Names of Gaia.”60
Names, not faces, not morphs of the same, something else, a thousand
somethings else, still telling of linked ongoing generative and destructive worlding and reworlding in this age of the earth. We need another
figure, a thousand names of something else, to erupt out of the Anthropocene into another, big-enough story. Bitten in a California redwood
forest by spidery Pimoa chthulhu, I want to propose snaky Medusa and
the many unfinished worldings of her antecedents, affiliates, and descendants. Perhaps Medusa, the only mortal Gorgon, can bring us into
the holobiomes of Terrapolis and heighten our chances for dashing the
twenty-first-century ships of the Heroes on a living coral reef instead
of allowing them to suck the last drop of fossil flesh out of dead rock.
The terra-cotta figure of Potnia Theron, the Mistress of the Animals,
depicts a winged goddess wearing a split skirt and touching a bird with
each hand.61 She is a vivid reminder of the breadth, width, and temporal
reach into pasts and futures of chthonic powers in Mediterranean and
Near Eastern worlds and beyond.62 Potnia Theron is rooted in Minoan
and then Mycenean cultures and infuses Greek stories of the Gorgons
(especially the only mortal Gorgon, Medusa) and of Artemis. A kind of
far-traveling Ur-Medusa, the Lady of the Beasts is a potent link between
Crete and India. The winged figure is also called Potnia Melissa, Mistress
of the Bees, draped with all their buzzing-stinging-honeyed gifts. Note
the acoustic, tactile, and gustatory senses elicited by the Mistress and
her sympoietic, more-than-human flesh. The snakes and bees are more
like stinging tentacular feelers than like binocular eyes, although these
critters see too, in compound-eyed insectile and many-armed optics.
In many incarnations around the world, the winged bee goddesses
are very old, and they are much needed now.63 Potnia Theron/Melissa’s
snaky locks and Gorgon face tangle her with a diverse kinship of chthonic
earthly forces that travel richly in space and time. The Greek word Gorgon
translates as dreadful, but perhaps that is an astralized, patriarchal hear52




Icon for the Chthulucene. Potnia Theron with a Gorgon Face. Type of Potnia
Theron, Kameiros, Rhodes, circa 600 BCE, terracotta, 13 in. diameter, British
Museum, excavated by Auguste Salzmann and Sir Alfred Bilotti; purchased 1860.
Photograph by Marie-Lan Nguyen, © 2007.

ing of much more awe-ful stories and enactments of generation, destruction, and tenacious, ongoing terran finitude. Potnia Theron/Melissa
Medusa give faciality a profound makeover, and that is a blow to modern humanist (including technohumanist) figurations of the forwardlooking, sky-gazing Anthropos. Recall that the Greek chthonios means
“of, in, or under the earth and the seas”—a rich terran muddle for sf,
science fact, science fiction, speculative feminism, and speculative fabulation. The chthonic ones are precisely not sky gods, not a foundation
for the Olympiad, not friends to the Anthropocene or Capitalocene,
and definitely not finished. The Earthbound can take heart—as well
as action.
The Gorgons are powerful winged chthonic entities without a proper
genealogy; their reach is lateral and tentacular; they have no settled lineage and no reliable kind (genre, gender), although they are figured and
Tentacular Thinking

storied as female. In old versions, the Gorgons twine with the Erinyes
(Furies), chthonic underworld powers who avenge crimes against the
natural order. In the winged domains, the bird-bodied Harpies carry out
these vital functions.64 Now, look again at the birds of Potnia Theron and
ask what they do. Are the Harpies their cousins? Around 700 bce Hesiod
imagined the Gorgons as sea demons and gave them sea deities for parents. I read Hesiod’s Theogony as laboring to stabilize a very bumptious
queer family. The Gorgons erupt more than emerge; they are intrusive
in a sense akin to what Stengers understands by Gaia.
The Gorgons turned men who looked into their living, venomous,
snake-encrusted faces into stone. I wonder what might have happened if
those men had known how to politely greet the dreadful chthonic ones.
I wonder if such manners can still be learned, if there is time to learn
now, or if the stratigraphy of the rocks will only register the ends and
end of a stony Anthropos.65
Because the deities of the Olympiad identified her as a particularly
dangerous enemy to the sky gods’ succession and authority, mortal
Medusa is especially interesting for my efforts to propose the Chthulucene as one of the big-enough stories in the netbag for staying with
the trouble of our ongoing epoch. I resignify and twist the stories, but
no more than the Greeks themselves constantly did.66 The hero Perseus
was dispatched to kill Medusa; and with the help of Athena, head-born
favorite daughter of Zeus, he cut off the Gorgon’s head and gave it to his
accomplice, this virgin goddess of wisdom and war. Putting Medusa’s
severed head face-forward on her shield, the Aegis, Athena, as usual,
played traitor to the Earthbound; we expect no better from motherless
mind children. But great good came of this murder-for-hire, for from
Medusa’s dead body came the winged horse Pegasus. Feminists have a
special friendship with horses. Who says these stories do not still move
us materially?67 And from the blood dripping from Medusa’s severed
head came the rocky corals of the western seas, remembered today in
the taxonomic names of the Gorgonians, the coral-like sea fans and sea
whips, composed in symbioses of tentacular animal cnidarians and photosynthetic algal-like beings called zooanthellae.68
With the corals, we turn definitively away from heady facial representations, no matter how snaky. Even Potnia Theron, Potnia Melissa,
and Medusa cannot alone spin out the needed tentacularities. In the
tasks of thinking, figuring, and storytelling, the spider of my first pages,
Pimoa chthulhu, allies with the decidedly nonvertebrate critters of the


seas. Corals align with octopuses, squids, and cuttlefish. Octopuses are
called spiders of the seas, not only for their tentacularity, but also for
their predatory habits. The tentacular chthonic ones have to eat; they
are at table, cum panis, companion species of terra. They are good figures
for the luring, beckoning, gorgeous, finite, dangerous precarities of the
Chthulucene. This Chthulucene is neither sacred nor secular; this earthly
worlding is thoroughly terran, muddled, and mortal—and at stake now.
Mobile, many-armed predators, pulsating through and over the coral
reefs, octopuses are called spiders of the sea. And so Pimoa chthulhu and
Octopus cyanea meet in the webbed tales of the Chthulucene.69
All of these stories are a lure to proposing the Chthulucene as a needed
third story, a third netbag for collecting up what is crucial for ongoing,
for staying with the trouble.70 The chthonic ones are not confined to a
vanished past. They are a buzzing, stinging, sucking swarm now, and human beings are not in a separate compost pile. We are humus, not Homo,
not anthropos; we are compost, not posthuman. As a suffix, the word kainos, “-cene,” signals new, recently made, fresh epochs of the thick present. To renew the biodiverse powers of terra is the sympoietic work and
play of the Chthulucene. Specifically, unlike either the Anthropocene or
the Capitalocene, the Chthulucene is made up of ongoing multispecies
stories and practices of becoming-with in times that remain at stake, in
precarious times, in which the world is not finished and the sky has not
fallen—yet. We are at stake to each other. Unlike the dominant dramas
of Anthropocene and Capitalocene discourse, human beings are not the
only important actors in the Chthulucene, with all other beings able
simply to react. The order is reknitted: human beings are with and of the
earth, and the biotic and abiotic powers of this earth are the main story.
However, the doings of situated, actual human beings matter. It matters with which ways of living and dying we cast our lot rather than others. It matters not just to human beings, but also to those many critters
across taxa which and whom we have subjected to exterminations, extinctions, genocides, and prospects of futurelessness. Like it or not, we
are in the string figure game of caring for and with precarious worldings
made terribly more precarious by fossil-burning man making new fossils
as rapidly as possible in orgies of the Anthropocene and Capitalocene.
Diverse human and nonhuman players are necessary in every fiber of
the tissues of the urgently needed Chthulucene story. The chief actors
are not restricted to the too-big players in the too-big stories of Capitalism and the Anthropos, both of which invite odd apocalyptic panics and
Tentacular Thinking

even odder disengaged denunciations rather than attentive practices of
thought, love, rage, and care.
Both the Anthropocene and the Capitalocene lend themselves too
readily to cynicism, defeatism, and self-certain and self-fulfilling predictions, like the “game over, too late” discourse I hear all around me these
days, in both expert and popular discourses, in which both technotheocratic geoengineering fixes and wallowing in despair seem to coinfect any
possible common imagination. Encountering the sheer not-us, morethan-human worlding of the coral reefs, with their requirements for ongoing living and dying of their myriad critters, is also to encounter the
knowledge that at least 250 million human beings today depend directly
on the ongoing integrity of these holobiomes for their own ongoing living and dying well. Diverse corals and diverse people and peoples are at
stake to and with each other. Flourishing will be cultivated as a multispecies response-ability without the arrogance of the sky gods and their
minions, or else biodiverse terra will flip out into something very slimy,
like any overstressed complex adaptive system at the end of its abilities
to absorb insult after insult.
Corals helped bring the Earthbound into consciousness of the Anthropocene in the first place. From the start, uses of the term Anthropocene
emphasized human-induced warming and acidification of the oceans
from fossil-fuel-generated co2 emissions. Warming and acidification are
known stressors that sicken and bleach coral reefs, killing the photosynthesizing zooanthellae and so ultimately their cnidarian symbionts
and all of the other critters belonging to myriad taxa whose worlding
depends on intact reef systems. Corals of the seas and lichens of the land
also bring us into consciousness of the Capitalocene, in which deep-sea
mining and drilling in oceans and fracking and pipeline construction
across delicate lichen-covered northern landscapes are fundamental to
accelerating nationalist, transnationalist, and corporate unworlding.
But coral and lichen symbionts also bring us richly into the storied tissues of the thickly present Chthulucene, where it remains possible—just
barely—to play a much better sf game, in nonarrogant collaboration
with all those in the muddle. We are all lichens; so we can be scraped
off the rocks by the Furies, who still erupt to avenge crimes against the
earth. Alternatively, we can join in the metabolic transformations between and among rocks and critters for living and dying well. “‘Do you
realize,’ the phytolinguist will say to the aesthetic critic, ‘that [once upon
a time] they couldn’t even read Eggplant?’ And they will smile at our



Day octopus, Octopus cyanea, in the water near Lanai, Hawaii.
Photograph by David Fleethham. © OceanwideImages.com.

ignorance, as they pick up their rucksacks and hike on up to read the
newly deciphered lyrics of the lichen on the north face of Pike’s Peak.’”71
Attending to these ongoing matters returns me to the question that
began this chapter. What happens when human exceptionalism and
the utilitarian individualism of classical political economics become unthinkable in the best sciences across the disciplines and interdisciplines?
Seriously unthinkable: not available to think with. Why is it that the
epochal name of the Anthropos imposed itself at just the time when understandings and knowledge practices about and within symbiogenesis
and sympoietics are wildly and wonderfully available and generative in
all the humusities, including noncolonizing arts, sciences, and politics?
What if the doleful doings of the Anthropocene and the unworldings of
the Capitalocene are the last gasps of the sky gods, not guarantors of the
finished future, game over? It matters which thoughts think thoughts.
We must think!
The unfinished Chthulucene must collect up the trash of the Anthropocene, the exterminism of the Capitalocene, and chipping and shredding and layering like a mad gardener, make a much hotter compost pile
for still possible pasts, presents, and futures.

Tentacular Thinking


Symbiogenesis and the Lively Arts
of Staying with the Trouble

Symbiogenesis

Sympoiesis is a simple word; it means “making-with.” Nothing makes
itself; nothing is really autopoietic or self-organizing. In the words of
the Inupiat computer “world game,” earthlings are never alone.1 That
is the radical implication of sympoiesis. Sympoiesis is a word proper to
complex, dynamic, responsive, situated, historical systems. It is a word
for worlding-with, in company. Sympoiesis enfolds autopoiesis and generatively unfurls and extends it.
The vivid four-by-six-foot painting called Endosymbiosis hangs in the
hallway joining the Departments of Geosciences and Biology at UMass
Amherst, near the Life and Earth Café, surely a spatial clue to how critters become-with each other.2 Perhaps as sensual molecular curiosity
and definitely as insatiable hunger, irresistible attraction toward enfolding each other is the vital motor of living and dying on earth. Critters
interpenetrate one another, loop around and through one another, eat
each another, get indigestion, and partially digest and partially assimilate one another, and thereby establish sympoietic arrangements that
are otherwise known as cells, organisms, and ecological assemblages.


Endosymbiosis: Homage to Lynn Margulis, Shoshanah Dubiner, 2012.
www.cybermuse.com.

Another word for these sympoietic entities is holobionts, or, etymologically, “entire beings” or “safe and sound beings.”3
That is decidedly not the same thing as One and Individual. Rather,
in polytemporal, polyspatial knottings, holobionts hold together contingently and dynamically, engaging other holobionts in complex patternings. Critters do not precede their relatings; they make each other
through semiotic material involution, out of the beings of previous such
entanglements. Lynn Margulis knew a great deal about “the intimacy
of strangers,” a phrase she proposed to describe the most fundamental
practices of critters becoming-with each other at every node of intraaction in earth history. I propose holoents as a general term to replace
“units” or “beings.”
Like Margulis, I use holobiont to mean symbiotic assemblages, at
whatever scale of space or time, which are more like knots of diverse
intra-active relatings in dynamic complex systems, than like the entities
of a biology made up of preexisting bounded units (genes, cells, organisms, etc.) in interactions that can only be conceived as competitive or
cooperative. Like hers, my use of holobiont does not designate host +
symbionts because all of the players are symbionts to each other, in diverse kinds of relationalities and with varying degrees of openness to
attachments and assemblages with other holobionts. Symbiosis is not a
synonym for “mutually beneficial.” The array of names needed to designate the heterogeneous webbed patterns and processes of situated and
dynamic dilemmas and advantages for the symbionts/holobionts is only
beginning to surface as biologists let go of the dictates of possessive
individualism and zero-sum games as the template for explanation.
An adept in the study of microbes, cell biology, chemistry, geology,
and paleogeography, as well as a lover of languages, arts, stories, systems
theories, and alarmingly generative critters, including human beings,
Margulis was a radical evolutionary theorist. Her first and most intense
loves were the bacteria and archaea of Terra and all their bumptious
doings. The core of Margulis’s view of life was that new kinds of cells,
tissues, organs, and species evolve primarily through the long-lasting
intimacy of strangers. The fusion of genomes in symbioses, followed
by natural selection—with a very modest role for mutation as a motor
of system level change—leads to increasingly complex levels of goodenough quasi-individuality to get through the day, or the aeon. Margulis
called this basic and mortal life-making process symbiogenesis.
Bacteria and archaea did it first. My sense is that in her heart of hearts
Margulis felt that bacteria and archaea did it all, and there wasn’t much
left for so-called higher-order biological entities to do or invent. Eventually, however, by fusing with each other in stabilized, ongoing ways,
archaea and bacteria invented the modern complex cell, with its nucleus
full of ropy chromosomes made of dna and proteins, and diverse other
sorts of extranuclear organelles, from undulating whips and spinning
blades for locomotion to specialized vesicles and tubules for a zillion
functions that work better kept a bit separate from each other.4 Because
she was a founder of Gaia theory with James Lovelock and a student
of interlocked and multileveled systemic processes of nonreductionist
organization and maintenance that make earth itself and earth’s living
beings unique, Margulis called these processes autopoietic.5 Perhaps she
would have chosen the term sympoietic, but the word and concept had
not yet surfaced.6 As long as autopoiesis does not mean self-sufficient
“self making,” autopoiesis and sympoiesis, foregrounding and backgrounding different aspects of systemic complexity, are in generative
friction, or generative enfolding, rather than opposition.
In 1998, a Canadian environmental studies graduate student named
M. Beth Dempster suggested the term sympoiesis for “collectivelyproducing systems that do not have self-defined spatial or temporal
boundaries. Information and control are distributed among components. The systems are evolutionary and have the potential for surprising change.” By contrast, autopoietic systems are “self-producing” autonomous units “with self defined spatial or temporal boundaries that
tend to be centrally controlled, homeostatic, and predictable.”7 Symbiosis makes trouble for autopoiesis, and symbiogenesis is an even bigger
troublemaker for self-organizing individual units. The more ubiquitous
symbiogenesis seems to be in living beings’ dynamic organizing processes, the more looped, braided, outreaching, involuted, and sympoietic
is terran worlding.
Mixotricha paradoxa is everyone’s favorite critter for explaining complex “individuality,” symbiogenesis, and symbiosis. Margulis described
this critter that is/are made up of at least five different taxonomic kinds
of cells with their genomes this way:
Under low magnification, M. paradoxa looks like a single-celled swimming ciliate. With the electron microscope, however, it is seen to consist of five distinct kinds of creatures. Externally, it is most obviously
the kind of one-celled organism that is classified as a protist. But inSympoiesis

side each nucleated cell, where one would expect to find mitochondria, are many spherical bacteria. On the surface, where cilia should
be, are some 250,000 hairlike Treponema spirochetes (resembling the
type that causes syphilis), as well as a contingent of large rod bacteria that is also 250,000 strong. In addition, we have redescribed
 spirochetes of a larger type and named them Canaleparolina
darwiniensis.8
Leaving out viruses, each M. paradoxa is not one, not five, not several hundred thousand, but a poster critter for holobionts. This holobiont lives in the gut of an Australian termite, Mastotermes darwiniensis,
which has its own sf stories to tell about ones and manys, or holoents.
Termite symbioses, including their doings with people, not to mention
mushrooms, are the stuff of legends—and cuisine. Check out the holobiomes of Macrotermes natalensis and its cultivated fungus Termitomyces,
recently in the science news.9 M. paradoxa and their ilk have been my
companions in writing and thinking for decades.
Since Darwin’s On the Origin of Species in 1859, biological evolutionary
theory has become more and more essential to our ability to think, feel,
and act well; and the interlinked Darwinian sciences that came together
roughly between the 1930s and 1950s into “the Modern Synthesis” or
“New Synthesis” remain astonishing. How could one be a serious person
and not honor such works as Theodosius Dobzhansky’s Genetics and the
Origin of Species (1937), Ernst Mayr’s Systematics and the Origin of Species
(1942), George Gaylord Simpson’s Tempo and Mode in Evolution (1944),
and even Richard Dawkins’s later sociobiological formulations within
the Modern Synthesis, The Selfish Gene (1976)? However, bounded units
(code fragments, genes, cells, organisms, populations, species, ecosystems) and relations described mathematically in competition equations
are virtually the only actors and story formats of the Modern Synthesis. Evolutionary momentum, always verging on modernist notions of
progress, is a constant theme, although teleology in the strict sense is
not. Even as these sciences lay the groundwork for scientific conceptualization of the Anthropocene, they are undone in the very thinking of
Anthropocene systems that require enfolded autopoietic and sympoietic
analysis.
Rooted in units and relations, especially competitive relations, the
sciences of the Modern Synthesis, for example, population genetics,
have a hard time with four key biological domains: embryology and de62 c h a p t e r t h r e e

velopment, symbiosis and collaborative entanglements of holobionts
and holobiomes, the vast worldings of microbes, and exuberant critter
biobehavioral inter- and intra-actions.10 Approaches tuned to “multispecies becoming-with” better sustain us in staying with the trouble on
terra. An emerging “New New Synthesis”—an extended synthesis—in
transdisciplinary biologies and arts proposes string figures tying together human and nonhuman ecologies, evolution, development, history, affects, performances, technologies, and more.
Indebted first to Margulis, I can only sketch a few aspects of the “Extended Evolutionary Synthesis” unfolding in the early twenty-first century.11 Forming part of her cosmopolitan heritage, formulations of symbiogenesis predate Margulis in the early twentieth-century work of the
Russian Konstantin Mereschkowsky and others.12 However, Margulis,
her successors, and her colleagues bring together symbiogenetic imaginations and materialities with all of the powerful cyborg tools of the late
twentieth-century molecular and ultrastructural biological revolutions,
including electron microscopes, nucleic acid sequencers, immunoassay
techniques, immense and comparative genomic and proteomic databases, and more. The strength of the Extended Synthesis is precisely in
the intellectual, cultural, and technical convergence that makes it possible to develop new model systems, concrete experimental practices,
research collaborations, and both verbal and mathematical explanatory
instruments. Such a convergence was materially impossible before the
s and after.
A model is a work object; a model is not the same kind of thing as a
metaphor or analogy. A model is worked, and it does work. A model is
like a miniature cosmos, in which a biologically curious Alice in Wonderland can have tea with the Red Queen and ask how this world works,
even as she is worked by the complex-enough, simple-enough world.
Models in biological research are stabilized systems that can be shared
among colleagues to investigate questions experimentally and theoretically. Traditionally, biology has had a small set of hard-working living
models, each shaped in knots and layers of practice to be apt for some
kinds of questions and not others. Listing seven basic model systems
of developmental biology (namely, fruit flies Drosophila melanogaster; a
nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans; the mouse Mus musculis; a frog, Xenopus laevis; the zebrafish Danio rerio; the chicken Gallus gallus; and the
mustard Arabidopsis thaliana), Scott Gilbert wrote,

Sympoiesis

The recognition that one’s organism is a model system provides a
platform upon which one can apply for funds, and it assures one of
a community of like-minded researchers who have identified problems that the community thinks are important. There has been much
lobbying for the status of a model system and the fear is that if your
organism is not a recognized model, you will be relegated to the backwaters of research. Thus, “model organisms” have become the center
for both scientific and political discussions in contemporary developmental biology.13
Excellent for studying how parts (genes, cells, tissues, etc.) of welldefined entities fit together into cooperating and/or competing units, all
seven of these individuated systems fail the researcher studying webbed
inter- and intra-actions of symbiosis and sympoiesis, in heterogeneous
temporalities and spatialities. Holobionts require models tuned to an expandable number of quasi-collective/quasi-individual partners in constitutive relatings; these relationalities are the objects of study. The partners
do not precede the relatings. Such models are emerging for the transformative processes of EcologicalEvolutionaryDevelopmental biology.
Margulis gave us dynamic multipartnered entities like Mixotricha
paradoxa to study the evolutionary invention of complex cells from the
intra- and interactions of bacteria and archaea. I will briefly introduce
two more models, each proposed and elaborated in the laboratory to
study a transformation of organizational patterning in the living world:
(1) a choanoflagellate-bacteria model for the invention of animal multicellularity, and (2) a squid-bacteria model for the elaboration of developmental symbioses between and among critters necessary to each other’s
becoming. A third symbiogenetic model for the formation of complex
ecosystems immediately suggests itself in the holobiomes of coral reefs,
and I will approach this model through science art worldings rather than
the experimental laboratory.
Although multicellular plants appeared on earth half a million years
earlier, because of its robustness and sympoietic richness, I focus on a
proposed model system for the emergence of animal multicellularity. Every living thing has emerged and persevered (or not) bathed and swaddled in bacteria and archaea. Truly nothing is sterile; and that reality
is a terrific danger, basic fact of life, and critter-making opportunity.
Using molecular and comparative genomic approaches and proposing
infectious—symbiogenetic—processes, Nicole King’s laboratory at the
University of California, Berkeley, works to reconstruct possible origins
and development of animal multicellularity.14 These scientists show
that interspecies—really, interkingdom—meetings and enfoldings can
produce entities that hold together, develop, communicate, and form
layered tissues like animals do.
As Alegado and King put it,
Comparisons among modern animals and their closest living relatives, the choanoflagellates, suggest that the first animals used flagellated collar cells to capture bacterial prey. The cell biology of prey
capture, such as cell adhesion between predator and prey, involves
mechanisms that may have been co-opted to mediate intercellular interactions during the evolution of animal multicellularity. Moreover,
a history of bacterivory may have influenced the evolution of animal
genomes by driving the evolution of genetic pathways for immunity
and facilitating lateral gene transfer. Understanding the interactions
between bacteria and the progenitors of animals may help to explain
the myriad ways in which bacteria shape the biology of modern animals, including ourselves.15
In Marilyn Strathern’s sense, partial connections abound. Getting hungry, eating, and partially digesting, partially assimilating, and partially
transforming: these are the actions of companion species.
King’s ambitious program is crafting a stabilized and genomically
well-characterized model system of cultures of choanoflagellates (Salpingoeca rosetta) and bacteria from the genus Algoriphagus to investigate
critical aspects of the formation of multicellular animals. Choanoflagellates can live as either single cells or multicellular colonies; what determines the transitions? The close evolutionary relationship between
choanoflagellates and animals lends strength to the model.16 The symbiogenetic theory of origins of multicellularity is contested; there are
attractive alternate explanations. What distinguishes King’s lab is its
production of a model system that is experimentally tractable, transferable in principle to other sites, and generative of testable questions
at the heart of being animal. To be animal is to become-with bacteria
(and, no doubt, viruses and many other sorts of critters; a basic aspect
of sympoiesis is its expandable set of players). No wonder the best science writers bring Nicole King’s lab into my dinner conversations on a
regular basis.17
Next, I hold out a tasty model system for studying developmental
Sympoiesis

symbioses. The question here is not how animals hold themselves together at all, but rather, how they craft developmental patternings that
take them through time in astonishing morphogeneses. My favorite
model is the diminutive Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes, and
its bacterial symbionts, Vibrio fischeri, which are essential for the squid’s
constructing its ventral pouch that houses luminescing bacteria, so that
the hunting squid can look like a starry sky to its prey below on dark
nights, or appear not to cast a shadow on moonlit nights. The squidbacterial symbiosis has proven remarkably generative for many kinds
of studies, “from ecology and evolution of a symbiotic system to the underlying molecular mechanisms of partner interactions that lead to establishment, development, and long-term-persistence of the alliance.”18
Unless the juvenile squid are infected in the right spot, at the right
time, by the right bacteria, they do not develop their own structures
for housing bacteria when they are hunting adults. The bacteria are
fully part of the squid’s developmental biology. In addition, the bacteria produce signals that regulate the adult squids’ circadian rhythms.
The squid regulate bacterial numbers, exclude unwanted associates, and
provide inviting surfaces for setting up vibrio homes. Herself trained in
marine invertebrate field biology, biochemistry, and biophysics, McFallNgai began work on the naturally occurring squid-bacteria holobiont
in 1988, when she started to collaborate with Edward (Ned) Ruby, a
microbiologist also interested in symbiosis. Remembering that other
vibrio bacteria are responsible for the pathogenic communication that
is cholera, I was not surprised to learn what multitalented communicators these sorts of bacteria are. As McFall-Ngai put it, “The Vibrionaceae
are a group of bacteria whose members often have broad physiological
scope and multiple ecological niches.”19 Material semiotics is exuberantly
chemical; the roots of language across taxa, with all its understandings
and misunderstandings, lie in such attachments.
The sympoietic collaborations of squid and bacteria are matched by
the sympoietic string figures across disciplines and methodologies, including genome sequencing, myriad imaging technologies, functional
genomics, and field biology, which make symbiogenesis such a powerful
framework for twenty-first-century biology. Working on pea aphid symbiosis with Buchnera, Nancy Moran emphasizes this point: “The primary
reason that symbiosis research is suddenly active, after decades at the
margins of mainstream biology, is that dna technology and genomics
give us enormous new ability to discover symbiont diversity, and more
significantly, to reveal how microbial metabolic capabilities contribute
to the functioning of hosts and biological communities.”20 I would add
the necessity of asking how the multicellular partners in the symbioses
affect the microbial symbionts. “Host-symbiont” seems an odd locution
for what is happening; at whatever size, all the partners making up holobionts are symbionts to each other.
Two transformative papers embody for me the profound scientific
changes afoot.21 Subtitling their paper “We Have Never Been Individuals,” Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber argue for holobionts and a symbiotic view
of life by summarizing the evidence against bounded units from anatomy, physiology, genetics, evolution, immunology, and development. In
“Animals in a Bacterial World: A New Imperative for the Life Sciences,”
the twenty-six coauthors present the growing knowledge of a vast range
of animal-bacterial interactions at both ecosystem and intimate symbiosis scales. They argue that this evidence should profoundly alter approaches to five questions: “how have bacteria facilitated the origin and
evolution of animals; how do animals and bacteria affect each other’s
genomes; how does normal animal development depend on bacterial
partners; how is homeostasis maintained between animals and their
symbionts; and how can ecological approaches deepen our understanding of the multiple levels of animal-bacterial interaction.”22
Stories about worried colleagues at conferences, uncomprehending reviewers unused to so much evidential and disciplinary boundary
crossing in one paper, or initially enthusiastic editors getting cold feet
surround these papers. Such stories normally surround risky and generative syntheses and propositions. The critics are a crucial part of the
holobiome of making science, and I am not a disinterested observer.23
Nonetheless, I think it matters that both of these papers were published
in prominent places at a critical inflection point in the curve of research
on, and explanation of, complex biological systems in the urgent times
called the Anthropocene, when the arts for living on a damaged planet
demand sympoietic thinking and action.
Interlacing Sciences and Arts with Involutionary Momentum

I am committed to art science worldings as sympoietic practices for living on a damaged planet. Carla Hustak and Natasha Myers gave all of us
a beautiful paper titled “Involutionary Momentum” that is a hinge for
me between symbiogenesis and the science art worldings I present in the
Sympoiesis

third section of this chapter. These authors reread Darwin’s own sensuous writing about his exquisite attention to absurdly sexual orchids and
their pollinating insects; Hustak and Myers also themselves attend to
the many enfoldings and communications among bees, wasps, orchids,
and scientists. The authors suggest that “involution” powers the “evolution” of living and dying on earth. Rolling inward enables rolling outward; the shape of life’s motion traces a hyperbolic space, swooping and
fluting like the folds of a frilled lettuce, coral reef, or bit of crocheting.
Like the biologists of the previous section, Hustak and Myers argue that
a zero-sum game based on competing methodological individualists is a
caricature of the sensuous, juicy, chemical, biological, material-semiotic,
and science-making world. Counting “articulate plants and other loquacious organisms” among their number, living critters love the floridly
repetitive mathematics of the pushes and pulls of hyperbolic geometry,
not the accountant’s hell of a zero-sum game.24
Rather, the orchid and its bee-pollinators are mutually constituted
through a reciprocal capture from which neither plant nor insect can
be disentangled . . . It is in encounters among orchids, insects, and
scientists that we find openings for an ecology of interspecies intimacies and subtle propositions. What is at stake in this involutionary
approach is a theory of ecological relationality that takes seriously
organisms’ practices, their inventions, and experiments crafting interspecies lives and worlds. This is an ecology inspired by a feminist
ethic of “response-ability” . . . in which questions of species difference
are always conjugated with attentions to affect, entanglement, and
rupture; an affective ecology in which creativity and curiosity characterize the experimental forms of life of all kinds of practitioners, not
only the humans.25
Orchids are famous for their flowers looking like the genitals of the female insects of the particular species needed to pollinate them. The right
sort of males seeking females of their own kind are drawn to the color,
shape, and alluring insectlike pheromones of a particular species of orchid. These interactions have been explained (away) in neo-Darwinian
orthodoxy as nothing but biological deception and exploitation of the
insect by the flower—in other words, an excellent example of the selfish
gene in action. Hustak and Myers instead read aslant neo-Darwinism,
even in this hard case of strong asymmetry of “costs and benefits,” to
find other necessary models for a science of plant ecology. The stories
of mutation, adaptation, and natural selection are not silenced; but
they are not turned up so loud as to deafen scientists, as if the evidence
demanded it, when increasingly something more complex is audible in
research across fields. “This requires reading with our senses attuned to
stories told in otherwise muted registers. Working athwart the reductive, mechanistic, and adaptationist logics that ground the ecological
sciences, we offer a reading that amplifies accounts of the creative, improvisational, and fleeting practices through which plants and insects
involve themselves in one another’s lives.”26
But what happens when a partner involved critically in the life of another disappears from the earth? What happens when holobionts break
apart? What happens when entire holobiomes crumble into the rubble
of broken symbionts? This kind of question has to be asked in the urgencies of the Anthropocene and Capitalocene if we are to nurture arts for
living on a damaged planet. In his science fiction novel The Speaker for
the Dead Orson Scott Card explored how a young boy who had excelled in
exterminationist technoscience in a cross-species war with an insectoid
hive species later in life took up responsibility for the dead, for collecting
up the stories for those left behind when a being, or a way of being, dies.
The man had to do what the boy, immersed only in cyber-realities and
deadly virtual war, was never allowed to do; the man had to visit, to live
with, to face the dead and the living in all of their materialities. The task
of the Speaker for the Dead is to bring the dead into the present, so as to
make more response-able living and dying possible in times yet to come.
My hinge to science art worldings turns on the ongoing performance of
memory by an orchid for its extinct bee.
In xkcd’s cartoon “Bee Orchid,” we know a vanished insect once existed because a living flower still looks like the erotic organs of the avid
female bee hungry for copulation. But the cartoon does something very
special; it does not mistake lures for identity; it does not say the flower
is exactly like the extinct insect’s genitals. Instead, the flower collects
up the presence of the bee aslant, in desire and mortality. The shape
of the flower is “an idea of what the female bee looked like to the male
bee . . . as interpreted by a plant . . . the only memory of the bee is a
painting by a dying flower.”27 Once embraced by living buzzing bees, the
flower is a speaker for the dead. A stick figure promises to remember
the bee flower when it comes time. The practice of the arts of memory enfold all terran critters. That must be part of any possibility for
resurgence!
Sympoiesis


“Bee Orchid.” © xkcd.com (Randall Munroe).

Science Art Worldings for Staying with the Trouble

I end this 
four engaged science art activist worldings committed to partial healing, modest rehabilitation, and still possible resurgence in the hard times of the imperial Anthropocene and Capitalocene.
I think of these worldings as stinger-endowed, unfurling, grasping tentacles of the ink-spurting, disguise-artist, hunting critters of an ongoing
past, present, and future called the Chthulucene.28 Speaking resurgence
to despair, the Chthulucene is the timespace of the symchthonic ones,
the symbiogenetic and sympoietic earthly ones, those now submerged
and squashed in the tunnels, caves, remnants, edges, and crevices of
damaged waters, airs, and lands. The chthonic ones are those indigenous
to the earth in myriad languages and stories; and decolonial indigenous
peoples and projects are central to my stories of alliance.
Each of the science art worldings cultivates robust response-ability
for powerful and threatened places and beings. Each is a model system
for sympoietic, multiplayer, multispecies thinking and action located
in a particularly sensitive place: (1) the Great Barrier Reef and all the
world’s coral reefs, with the Crochet Coral Reef project, initiated and
coordinated by the Institute for Figuring in Los Angeles; (2) the island
Republic of Madagascar, with the Malagasy-English children’s natural
history book series called the Ako Project, made possible by multinational friendships among scientists and artists; (3) the circumpolar
northern lands of the Inupiat in Alaska, site of the Never Alone computer
game project, centered in story-making practices among the Inupiat29
and brought into being by the sympoiesis of E-Line Media and the Cook
Inlet Tribal Council; and, my most developed case, (4) Black Mesa and
the Navajo and Hopi lands enmeshed in Arizona, site of many-threaded
coalitional work including Black Mesa Indigenous Support, Black Mesa
Trust (Hopi), the scientists and indigenous herding people committed to
Navajo-Churro sheep, Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land, the mostly
Diné activists of the Black Mesa Water Coalition, and the people and
sheep of Diné be’iiná / The Navajo Lifeway.30
Each of these projects is a case of noninnocent, risky, committed “becoming involved in one another’s lives.”31 Making-with and tangled-with
the tentacular ones, which are gripping and stinging for an ongoing generative Chthulucene, each is a sf string figure of multispecies becomingwith. These science art worldings are holobiomes, or holoents, in which
scientists, artists, ordinary members of communities, and nonhuman
Sympoiesis

beings become enfolded in each other’s projects, in each other’s lives;
they come to need each other in diverse, passionate, corporeal, meaningful ways. Each is an animating project in deadly times. They are sympoietic, symbiogenetic, and symanimagenic.

Four Critical Zones
Bathed in hot and acid oceans that are becoming more acidic and hotter
by the decade, coral holobiomes everywhere are threatened. Coral reefs
have the highest biodiversity of any kind of marine ecosystem. The symbiosis of cnidarian polyps, photosynthesizing dinoflagellates called zooanthellae living in the coral tissue, and a horde of microbes and viruses
make up the keystone of the coral holobiome, which is home to multitudes of other critters. Hundreds of millions of human beings, many of
them very poor, depend directly on healthy coral ecosystems for their
livelihoods.32 Such sentences hugely understate coral interdependence
with human and nonhuman critters. Recognition of dying coral reef ecosystems in warming and acidifying seas was at the heart of advancing
the very term Anthropocene in 2000. Coral, along with lichens, are also
the earliest instances of symbiosis recognized by biologists; these are the
critters that taught biologists to understand the parochialism of their
own ideas of individuals and collectives. These critters taught people
like me that we are all lichens, all coral. In addition, deepwater reefs in
some locations seem to be able to function as refugia for replenishing
damaged corals in shallower waters.33 Coral reefs are the forests of the
sea, like Anna Tsing’s forest refugia of the land. Besides all of this, coral
reef worlds are achingly beautiful. I cannot imagine it is only human
people who know this beauty in their flesh.
A large island nation off the east coast of Africa, the Republic of Madagascar is home to complex, layered tapestries of historically situated
peoples and other critters, including lemurs, close relatives of monkeys
and apes. Nine out of ten kinds of Madagascar’s nonhuman critters,
including all species of lemurs, live nowhere else on earth. The rate of
extinction and destruction of the many kinds of Madagascar’s forests
and watersheds vital for rural people (the large majority of Madagascar’s
human citizens), urban and town residents, and myriad nonhumans is
almost beyond imagination, except that it is well advanced—but not
uncontested locally and translocally. Evidence from photography indicates that 40 to 50 percent of the forests of Madagascar that were still
thriving in 1950 are gone now, along with their critters, including their
people, who for centuries harvested (and cultivated) woodland bounty
for their lives. Forest well-being is one of the most urgent priorities for
flourishing—indeed, survival—all over the earth. The contestations
must matter; it’s not a choice, it’s a necessity.34
The circumpolar North bears the brunt of the Anthropocene and Capitalocene. The Arctic is warming at almost twice the rate of the global
average. Sea ice, glaciers, and permafrost melt; people, animals, microbes, and plants can no longer rely on the seasons, nor indeed on the
temporally punctuated solid or liquid forms of matter crucial to their
perceptions and ways of getting on in life. Eating each other properly
requires meeting each other properly, and that requires good-enough
synchronicity. Synchronicity is exactly one of the system properties
flipping out all over earth. Change on earth is not the problem; rates
and distributions of change are very much the problem. In addition,
consumption-obsessed imperial circumpolar nations vie with each other
in increasingly militarized seas to claim and extract the huge reserves of
carbonized fossils encased in the far North, promising a further release
of greenhouse gases on a scale that simply cannot be allowed to happen. A geophysical, geopolitical storm of unprecedented proportions is
changing practices of living and dying across the North. The coalitions
of peoples and critters facing this storm are critical to the possibilities
of earth’s powers of resurgence.
Located on the four-thousand-square-mile Colorado Plateau, Black
Mesa, or Big Mountain, is ancestral land for both Hopi and Diné peoples.
Black Mesa is also a contemporary place needed by both Navajo and
Hopi families for income, food, water, sociality, and ceremony. The Black
Mesa coalfield, once a huge Pleistocene lake, is the largest coal deposit in
the United States. Beginning in 1968, this colonizing capitalist extractive
nation hosted the largest strip-mining operation in North America, run
by the Peabody Western Coal Company, part of Peabody Energy, the
world’s largest private-sector coal company. For forty years, coal from
the Black Mesa strip mine was pulverized, mixed with immense quantities of pristine water from the irreplaceable Navajo aquifer, and carried
in a giant slurry pipeline (owned by Southern Pacific) 273 miles to the
heavily polluting coal-fired Mohave Generating Station in Nevada, built
by the Bechtel Corporation. This plant provided energy for the blooming toxic cities in the desert Southwest, including Los Angeles. People
living on Black Mesa to this day have neither assured clean water nor
Sympoiesis

reliable electricity, and many of their wells failed as the Navajo aquifer
was depleted. Sheep that drink from sulfate-rich toxic waste ponds die,
and groundwater is polluted.
First the slurry pipe, then the Black Mesa mine, and finally the Mohave Generating Station were closed down in 2005 through the concerted
work of both indigenous and settler environmentalists.35 Attempting to
combine operations with its nearby Kayenta site under a single renewal
permit running to 2026, Peabody currently has plans to reopen and expand the Black Mesa mine, targeting still more land needed by sheep and
people, not to mention other critters. The expanded operation would
wash coal with water from the Coconino Aquifer.
Coal from the Kayenta strip mine is shipped ninety-seven miles to
the Navajo Generating Station (ngs) on the Arizona-Utah border, near
Glen Canyon Dam; the ngs is the largest power-generating plant in the
U.S. West.36 The irony of the power station’s name should escape no
one, since half of Navajo homes do not have electricity and the Navajo
Nation does not own the plant. Even setting aside the long-term wellbeing of people, other critters, land, and water, without a serious share
in the profits made from coal and affordable energy for local residents,
dependence on coal-related jobs keeps the Navajo Nation, as well as the
Hopi, in a vise grip. Unemployment in the Navajo Nation runs aroundpercent, and both Hopi and Diné are among the poorest citizens of the
United States. When built by Bechtel in the 1970s on land leased from
the Navajo Nation, this plant was the second-largest utility in the United
States. The largest owner of the Navajo Generating Station is the federal
government’s Bureau of Reclamation in the Department of the Interior;
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, also in the Department of the Interior, is
charged with protecting Native lands and resources. Coyote is well and
truly in the sheep corral in that arrangement. In 2010 Peabody’s Kayenta
mine was listed among the most dangerous in the United States and
targeted for increased scrutiny by the federal Mine Safety and Health
Administration.37 This plant powers the pumping stations that transfer
the waters of the Colorado River through a 336-mile-long aqueduct to
the always fast-growing cities of Tucson and Phoenix. Amid ongoing
struggles over both the plant’s effect on air quality and access to water
in the desert, in 2014 the ngs obtained a permit to continue operation
as a conventional coal-fired plant until December 2044.38
Hopi ancestors dug coal for their fires out of seams in Black Mesa’s
sandstone for centuries. Despite a destructive meme to the contrary—a
very useful meme for the fossil fuel extraction industry—Diné and Hopi
agriculturalists and herders lived adjacent to and among each other in
mixed amity and competition until the advent of industrial-scale coal
mining on Black Mesa, which engineered intense conflict conveniently
misread as timeless tribal feuds. In 1966, transnational corporations
obtained leases signed by both tribal councils, without discussion or
consent by the great majority of tribal members or collective bodies
(kivas, chapters). The terms of bargaining for these leases were both
inherently asymmetrical and enabled by ethically compromised legal
processes, epitomized by a lawyer and bishop of the Mormon church
named John Boyden, who, without the Hopi’s knowledge, worked simultaneously for Peabody and selected Hopi leaders. Thousands of Navajo
lived on Black Mesa, including some of the most traditional among the
Diné. The Navajo tribal council initially refused to work with Boyden,
so he cultivated Hopi whose leaders were bitterly factionalized between
so-called traditionalists and progressives, beginning at a time when the
Hopi had no overall governing council. Boyden worked effectively over
a long period to craft legislation to clear the land of Navajo sheep people
and to shift legal control to the Hopi, who did not live on the land that
would be strip-mined. Traditional Hopi fiercely opposed Boyden, but to
no avail. Well connected in Washington, Boyden was crucial to crafting
the legal, political, and economic strategy to exploit Black Mesa’s coal
bounty. A Freedom of Information Act suit filed by the Native American
Rights Fund ascertained that out of funds held in a federal trust for the
Hopi, over thirty years Boyden was paid $2.7 million for his “pro bono”
services to the tribe.39
In 1974, the U.S. Congress passed a bill introduced by Arizona senator John McCain, a man with close personal and family ties to mining
and energy industries, called the Navajo-Hopi Land Settlement Act. The
act has resulted in the forced removal of up to fifteen thousand Diné
without serious provision of anywhere for people and animals to go,
even if ties to specific places were irrelevant. But both sheep and people
know and care a great deal where they come from, where they are, and
where they go.40 In 1980 the federal government purchased a uraniumcontaminated site near Chambers, Arizona, as new lands for the evicted
Diné. In 1996, McCain, then chairman of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, authored a second forced relocation act. The Navajo turned
to the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights. The struggle continues, with extraordinary efforts by young activists to heal the
Sympoiesis

coal-scarred wounds dividing Hopi and Navajo. In 2005, 75 percent of
overall annual Hopi income and 40 percent of Navajo income derived
ultimately from Black Mesa mining operations. The struggle is dauntingly complex.41
The stories I will tell about Black Mesa are about resurgence in the
face of genocide and extermination, about sheep and weaving, about
art science activist worldings, about coalitions in struggle for what the
Navajo call hózhó—balance, harmony, beauty, right relations of land and
people—in this troubled world on the Colorado Plateau.
And so these are four critical zones of the tussle between the Anthropocene and Capitalocene, on the one hand, and the Chthulucene, on the
other: coral forests of the oceans, diverse tropical forests of an island
nation and ecosystem, rapidly melting arctic lands and seas, and coal
seams and aquifers of indigenous lands linked in a global chain of ongoing colonial anthropogenic devastation. It is time to turn to sympoietic worldings, to vital models crafted in sf patterns in each zone, where
ordinary stories, ordinary becoming “involved in each other’s lives,” propose ways to stay with the trouble in order to nurture well-being on a
damaged planet. Symchthonic stories are not the tales of heroes; they
are the tales of the ongoing.

Resurgence in Four Parts

The Crochet Coral Reef
In 1997, Daina Taimina, a Latvian mathematician at Cornell University,
“finally worked out how to make a physical model of hyperbolic space
that allows us to feel, and to tacitly explore the properties of this unique
geometry. The method she used was crochet.”42 With this tie between
math and fiber arts in mind, in 2005, after reading an article on coral
bleaching, Christine Wertheim, a crafter and poet, suggested to her twin
sister Margaret, a mathematician and artist, “We should crochet a coral
reef.”43 We can fight for the coral reefs that way, implied this odd imperative. The sisters were watching an episode of Xena Warrior Princess, and
Xena’s and her sidekick Gabrielle’s fabulous fighting action—or maybe
just the incomparable Lucy Lawless and Renee O’Connor—inspired
them.44 The consequences have been utterly out of proportion to what
the twin sisters in Los Angeles imagined that first night. So far, about
eight thousand people, mostly women, in twenty-seven countries—

Beaded jellyfish made by Vonda N. McIntyre for the Crochet Coral Reef.
From the collection of the Institute for Figuring (IFF). Photograph © IFF.

from Ireland, Latvia, the United Arab Emirates, Australia, the United
States, the UK, Croatia, and more—have come together to crochet in
wool, cotton, plastic bags, discarded reel-to-reel tape, vinyl jelly yarn,
Saran wrap, and just about anything else that can be induced to loop and
whirl in the codes of crocheting.
The code is so simple: crocheted models of hyperbolic planes achieve
their ruffled forms by progressively increasing the number of stitches in
each row. The emergent vitalities of this wooly experimental life-form
take diverse corporeal shape as crafters increase the numbers from row
to row irregularly, oddly, whimsically, or strictly to see what forms they
could make—not just any forms, but crenulated beings that take life
as marine critters of the vulnerable reefs.45 “Every woolen form has
its fibrous dna.”46 But wool is hardly the only material. Plastic bottle
anemone trees with trash tendrils and anemones made from New York
Times blue plastic wrappers find their reef habitats. Making fabulated,
rarely mimetic, but achingly evocative models of coral reef ecosystems,
or maybe of just a few critters, the Crochet Coral Reef has morphed into
what is probably the world’s largest collaborative art project.
The involutionary momentum of the crochet coral reef powers the
sympoietic knotting of mathematics, marine biology, environmental
activism, ecological consciousness raising, women’s handicrafts, fiber
arts, museum display, and community art practices. A kind of hyperbolic
embodied knowledge, the crochet reef lives enfolded in the materialities
of global warming and toxic pollution; and the makers of the reef practice multispecies becoming-with to cultivate the capacity to respond,
response-ability.47 The crochet reef is the fruit of “algorithmic code, improvisational creativity, and community engagement.”48 The reef works
not by mimicry, but by open-ended, exploratory process. “Iterate, deviate, elaborate” are the principles of the process.49 dna could not have
said it better.
The Crochet Coral Reef has a core set of reefs made for exhibitions,
like the first ones at the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh and the Chicago Cultural Center, both in 2007, to the Coral Forest exhibited in Abu
Dhabi in 2014 and beyond. The morphing assemblages are kept at the
Los Angeles Institute for Figuring (iff), and they fill the Wertheims’
home. The iff is the Wertheims’ nonprofit organization in LA, founded
in 2003 and dedicated to “the aesthetic dimensions of mathematics,
science, and engineering.”50 The core concept is material play, and the
iff proposes and enacts not think tanks or work tanks, but play tanks,
which I understand as arts for living on a damaged planet. The iff and
the Crochet Coral Reef are art-science-activist worldings, bringing people together to do string figures with math, sciences, and arts in order
to make active attachments that might matter to resurgence in the Anthropocene and Capitalocene—that is, to make string figures tangled
in the Chthulucene. There are incarnations of a “biodiverse reef,” “toxic
reef,” “bleached reef,” “coral forest,” “plastic midden,” “white spire garden,” “bleached bone reef,” “beaded coral garden,” “coral forest medusa,”
and more, along with the many satellite reefs made by collectives of
crafters that come together all over the world to mount local exhibits.
Crafters make fabulated healthy reefs, but my sense is that most of the
reefs show the stigmata of plastic trash, bleaching, and toxic pollution.
Crocheting with this trash feels to me like the looping of love and rage.
The skills and sensibilities of Margaret and Christine Wertheim, who
were born in Brisbane near the Great Barrier Reef, are fundamental,
along with the skills and concerns of the thousands of reef crafters. With
degrees in mathematics and physics, Margaret Wertheim is a science
writer, curator, and artist. She has written extensively on the cultural
history of theoretical physics. Her 2009 ted talk “The Beautiful Math
of Coral” has been watched by over a million people.51 With two books
written in feminine feminist materialist poetics, Christine Wertheim is a
poet, performer, artist, critic, curator, crafter, and teacher. She aptly describes her work as “infesting fertile zones between cunning linguistics,
psychoanalysis, poetry and gender studies.”52 Clearly, these twin sisters
were primed for sympoietic sf.
Infecting each other and anyone who comes into contact with their
fibrous critters, the thousands of crafters crochet psychological, material, and social attachments to biological reefs in the oceans, but not by
practicing marine field biology or by diving among the reefs or making
some other direct contact. Rather, the crafters stitch “intimacy without proximity,” a presence without disturbing the critters that animate
the project, but with the potential for being part of work and play for
confronting the exterminationist, trashy, greedy practices of global industrial economies and cultures.53 Intimacy without proximity is not
“virtual” presence; it is “real” presence, but in loopy materialities. The
abstractions of the mathematics of crocheting are a kind of lure to an
affective cognitive ecology stitched in fiber arts. The crochet reef is a
practice of caring without the neediness of touching by camera or hand
in yet another voyage of discovery. Material play builds caring publics.
Sympoiesis


Green turtles (Chelonia mydas) crawling out of the ocean onto the beach to lay
their eggs. Credit: Mark Sullivan, NOAA, Permit #10137-07.

The result is another strong thread in the holobiome of the reef: we are
all corals now.
Returning to the birth tendrils of the Wertheim sisters in coral reef
worlds, I close this little section on the Crochet Coral Reef with a gorgeous photo of green sea turtles coming out of the ocean onto the beach
to lay their eggs. Laying their eggs in more than eighty countries and
endangered or threatened everywhere, green turtles are globally distributed across the tropical and subtropical belt of earth. A portrait of
another green turtle flying in the ocean over the Great Barrier Reef in
Australia advertises the Regional Chamber of the Rights of Nature Tribunal held in Far North Queensland in 2015.54 About eighteen thousand
female turtles nest each season on Raine Island in the Great Barrier
Reef; this population is one of only two large nesting groups on the earth
today.55 The tribunal collected statements from Aboriginal witnesses
about proper governance of the reef to present at the International Tribunal for the Rights of Nature during the Climate Change summit in
Paris in December 2015. Sea turtles, corals, Aboriginal witnesses on the
care of decolonizing Country, the holobiomes of scientists, denizens of

Page from Tik-Tik the Ringtailed Lemur / Tikitiki Ilay Maky. UNICEF
Madagascar and the Lemur Conservation Foundation. Text by Alison Jolly and
Hanta Rasamimanana. Art by Deborah Ross. Courtesy of Margaretta Jolly.

the Chthulucene, diverse environmental justice activists, and international art science crafters come together in sf, in speculative fabulation
for flourishing.

The Madagascar Ako Project
As a Yale graduate student studying lemur behavior in 1962 in what is
now the Berenty Primate Reserve, Alison Jolly fell into noninnocent
love and knowledge in her first encounter with female-led, swaggering,
opportunistic ring-tailed lemurs in the spiny forest and dry gallery forest of the south of the island. Simply and transformatively, this young
six-foot-tall American white woman became a lover and seeker of knowledge and well-being with and for the beings of Madagascar, especially
the astonishing species of lemurs, the radically different forest ecosystems the length and breadth of the island, and the land’s complex people
and peoples. Author of many books and scientific papers and participant
in numerous study and conservation teams, Jolly died in 2014. Her contributions to primatology, biodiversity conservation, and historically
informed, passionate analyses of conservation conflicts and necessities
were legion. But Jolly herself seemed especially to prize the sympoietic
Sympoiesis

gift she helped craft, the Ako Project,56 which is tuned to practices for
resurgence in vulnerable Malagasy worlds. This is the part of her work
I most love.57
In the marrow of her bones, Jolly understood the terrible contradictions and frictions in her embrace of both the rural people, who cut and
burn the forests to make small agricultural plots called tavy, and her
beloved prosimians with all their forest partners.58 Of course, she knew
she was not Malagasy, but at best a guest who might reciprocate appropriately, and at worst another in a long line of colonizers, always taking
land and giving advice for the best reasons. Aware of the controversies
over whether shifting cultivators destroyed or nurtured and managed
the forest, she learned a great deal about what made contemporary, escalating tavy burnings lethal to the future of the forests and of all their
critters, including the people who need them not just for their products
(including lemurs for food), but to sustain fertility in phosphorous-poor
tropical soils. She knew that making tavy had been part of the cycle
of forest succession and biodiversity maintenance, with evidence in old
stands in Ranomafana Park. But, she argued, not anymore. Nothing
has time to regenerate anymore. Jolly knew in detail what the press of
rapidly increasing human numbers means to the forests in the situated
history of multiple land dispossessions, relocations, violent suppressions, imposition of regimes of private property, insecure markets, a
succession of failed national governments, huge solicited and imposed
national debt, and broken development promises. She wrote vividly
about local people’s accurate assessment of the effects of generations
of visiting experts, while the experts and visiting research scientists often knew little or nothing about the terrible history of land seizures,
colonial and postcolonial search-and-destroy operations, rapacious extraction schemes, and the impact on villagers of the failed projects of
usually well intentioned but often ignorant foreign scientists and both
local and foreign ngos. She also knew what sustained committed work
of real colleagues and friends could accomplish in Madagascar against
the odds and across differences of all sorts. There are many possible
examples and many important people, but I want to tell about one little
project that might be considered a model system for sympoiesis.
Written in both English and Malagasy, each book in the Ako Project
vividly narrates the adventures of a young Malagasy lemur from one
of six species, from the tiny mouse lemur or ny tsididy, to the queer-

fingered aye-aye or ny aiay, to singing Indri or ilay babakoto. The stories
are fleshed-out natural histories, full of the empirical sensuous curiosity of that genre; and they are bumptious adventures of gutsy young
lemurs living the joys and dangers of their habitats and of their groups’
social arrangements. Surrounding each lemur species with diverse plant
and animal critters proper to their habitats, the project provides both
teachers’ guides in Malagasy and beautifully crafted posters showing the
unique regions of Madagascar where the stories take place. The books
are not textbooks; they are stories, feasts for mind, heart, and body for
children (and adults) who have no access to storybooks or to the critters
of their own nation or even region. Most Malagasy never see a lemur on
the land, on television, or in a book. Those privileged enough to go to a
school with books saw pictures of French rabbits, a fact Alison Jolly told
me with disgust in the 1980s when I interviewed her for Primate Visions.
Many villages are still without schools; and the formal curriculum for
children, whether modeled on the older French system or newer learnercentered approaches, is irrelevant to most of the population. State financing for rural schools is extremely paltry, and most rural children are
taught by community teachers with no teacher training and no income
except from fees paid by very poor families. Teaching about local critters
or ecologies rarely happens.
The Ako Project did an end run around the starved schools and unresponsive bureaucracies. After Jolly saw the alluring watercolors of fauna
and flora by Deborah Ross, she asked the artist if she would illustrate her
children’s books about lemurs. Ross said yes; Jolly then contacted her
old friend, the lemur biologist Hantanirina Rasamimanana. They raised
money; the project was off and running.59 In exciting, beautiful, funny,
and scary stories, distributed outside the school bureaucracies, the Ako
Project nurtures empathy and knowledge about the extraordinary biodiversity of Madagascar for the Malagasy.
The Ako Project is the generative fruit of a colleagueship and friendship over decades.60 In 1983 Alison Jolly met Hanta Rasamimanana, a
scientist seventeen years her junior. They bonded as mothers doing
fieldwork in challenging conditions, primatologists riveted by ringtailed lemurs, lovers of Malagasy people and nature, and participants
in global and local politics, with differently situated vulnerability and
authority. Born in the capital city and part of the generation sponsored
by the Soviet Union under Didier Ratsiraka’s socialism, Rasamimanana

Sympoiesis


Painting for Tsambiki Ilamba Fotsy / Bounce the White Sifaka. UNICEF
Madagascar and the Lemur Conservation Foundation. Text by Alison Jolly and
Hanta Rasamimanana. Art by Deborah Ross. Courtesy of Margaretta Jolly
and Deborah Ross.

trained in animal husbandry at the Veterinary Academy in Moscow. She
earned a PhD at the Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle in Paris, and
she has a master’s in primate conservation. She is professor of zoology
and scientific education at l’École Normale Supérieure of Antananarivo.
Studying ringtails, Rasamimanana has published on feeding behavior,
energy expenditure, and lemur female precedence and supreme authority in their societies (“dominance”). Her responsibilities in the scientific
academy of Madagascar have been multiple, and she initiated a master’s
degree in primate conservation run in Mahajanga and the Comoros. An
adviser on the Madagascar National Curriculum, she heads the Ako Project teacher support program and wrote the Malagasy teacher’s guides
based on workshops she ran in rural areas.61
In the summer of 2013, Rasamimanana was the program chair for
the Fifth International Prosimian Congress, held at the Centre ValBio
Research Campus in Ranomafana National Park, where Alison Jolly’s
friend and colleague Patricia Wright and so many others had worked for
decades to strengthen biodiversity and primate research in Madagascar
and by Malagasy scientists.62 Eighty of the two hundred participants in
 were from Madagascar. Half of the two hundred present were students, the core of the next generation of scientists dedicated to holding
open space and time for lemurs and their associates in vulnerable forest webs. Writing in her conservation diaries shortly before her death,
Jolly celebrated what this congress meant: “The big change is that most
papers are by Malagasy speaking on their own biodiversity, eager to advance their own careers in conservation. A contrast to the continuing
bewilderment of so many other Malagasy as to why anyone would want
to visit forests! And a huge swing from all the meetings in the past dominated by foreigners.”63
In all their attachments, working with book and poster artists, together the scientists and storytellers Jolly and Rasamimanana brought
the Ako Project into the world. In this project and in their work and
play across many crises in Madagascar and its conservation history, they
have nurtured new generations of Malagasy naturalists and scientists,
including small children, field station guides, and school and university
students. Without innocence and with relentless commitment, Jolly and
Rasamimanana have practiced, in solidarity, the arts of living on a damaged planet; it matters.

Sympoiesis


Cover image for Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna). Courtesy of E-line Media,
in collaboration with Upper One Games, and the Cook Inlet Tribal Council.

Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna)
My third example of science art worlding for living on a damaged planet
is making “world games.” World games are made with and from indigenous peoples’ stories and practices. “But what good are old stories if
the wisdom they contain is not shared?”64 These games both remember
and create worlds in dangerous times; they are worlding practices. Indigenous peoples around the earth have a particular angle on the discourses of coming extinctions and exterminations of the Anthropocene
and Capitalocene.65 The idea that disaster will come is not new; disaster,
indeed genocide and devastated home places, has already come, decades
and centuries ago, and it has not stopped. The resurgence of peoples
and of places is nurtured with ragged vitality in the teeth of such loss,
mourning, memory, resilience, reinvention of what it means to be native, refusal to deny irreversible destruction, and refusal to disengage
from living and dying well in presents and futures. World games require
inventive, sympoietic collaborations that bring together such things as
computer game platforms and their designers, indigenous storytellers,
visual artists, carvers and puppet makers, digital-savvy youngsters, and
community activists. The set of computer world games at the moment
I write this sentence is small; there is one. Others, however, are in the
collaboration and design phase.66
However, even though the models of sympoiesis are expandable, it is
critical not to once again raid situated indigenous stories as resources
for the woes of colonizing projects and peoples, entities that seem permanently undead. Never Alone is not a New Age game for universal
oneness, a posthumanist solution to epistemological crises, a general
model for collaboration, or a way to finesse the Anthropocene with Native Climate Wisdom. Nor is Never Alone a primer for the Chthulucene.
If Inupiat “Sila” meets in sf games with the tentacular Chthulucene, it
will be a risk-taking proposition, not an innocent translation.67 Never
Alone requires a different sort of attention; and perhaps the fact that I
continue to die early and often playing the game is less a reflection of my
poor gaming skills than a proper reminder that a world game is situated
indigenous storytelling in specific histories. The fact that the game is
narrated in Inupiaq, with English subtitles, is another reminder where
worlding authority lies here. Stories, even stories offered for sale on the
Internet, belong to storytellers, who share them, or not, in practices of
situated worlding. The conditions for sharing stories must not be set
by raiders, academic or otherwise.68 That does not mean the game is restricted to native commentators in native places for native audiences in
a perverse caricature of a reservation. It does mean the terms of telling,
listening, and playing have been relocated decisively.
“Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna) is the first game developed in collaboration with the Inupiat, an Alaska Native people. Play as a young
Inupiat girl and an arctic fox as they set out to find the source of the
eternal blizzard which threatens the survival of everything they have
ever known.”69 No one acts alone; connections and corridors are practical
and material, even if also fabulous, located in what Anglophones tend to
dismiss as the spirit world. The girl Nuna’s personal courage and skills
are also fundamental. These are the arts of living on a damaged planet
(Anna Tsing’s term). Never Alone might be played in a string figure pattern with Ursula Le Guin’s Always Coming Home.
Game makers define the new genre “world games” as taking place
inside ongoing indigenous stories. Makers of Never Alone (Kisima Ingitchuna) include Gloria O’Neill, the president and chief executive of the
Cook Inlet Tribal Council; dozens of advisers and elders from the Alaska
Native community; Alan Gershenfeld, cofounder of E-line Media; E-Line
creative director Sean Vesce; the design team’s studio in Seattle; young
Sympoiesis

and old people playing the game; and a shared sense of contemporary urgency for the lands and waters with their human and other-than-human
beings. “O’Neill said she loved the chance to participate in the video
game because the council could be a codeveloper in the process—and
because no Native American group had ever played such a role in the
history of the video game industry.”70
The sympoiesis of Never Alone has many threads, and one of them is
hard for most modernist people, namely the symanimagenic richness of
the stories and the game. The girl Nuna and her arctic fox companion go
from the home village to face the unprecedented blizzard, find what is
causing it, and save the people and the land. Helping each other, girl and
fox learn to traverse many obstacles, and even to swim in the belly of a
whale, finally escaping into the sky through the blowhole. Those kinds of
sym linkages and fabled travels are not an ontological or epistemological
problem, or at least not much of one. But the presence and agency of
multiple spirit helpers are absolutely central to this worlding, to these
stories, and to this sympoiesis in the Arctic of the Anthropocene. Digital
information system ontologies, spirit helpers, and biocultural girls and
foxes have to play an agile string figure game seriously for “never alone”
to have its full meaning.
Working with Brazilian Amerindian hunters, with whom he learned
to theorize the radical conceptual realignment he called multinaturalism
and perspectivism, Eduardo Viveiros de Castro wrote, “Animism is the
only sensible version of materialism.”71 I am not talking about people like
me—or kids like Nuna—“believing” in the spirit world. Belief is neither an indigenous nor a “chthulucenean” category. Relentlessly mired
in both internecine and colonizing disputes of Christianity, including
its scholarly and civic secular forms, the category of belief is tied to doctrine, profession, confession, and taxonomies of errors. That is, believing is not sensible.72 I am talking about material semiotics, about practices of worlding, about sympoiesis that is not only symbiogenetic, but
is always a sensible materialism. The sensible materialisms of involutionary momentum are much more innovative than secular modernisms will
allow. Stories for living in the Chthulucene demand a certain suspension
of ontologies and epistemologies, holding them lightly, in favor of more
venturesome, experimental natural histories. Without inhabiting symanimagenic sensible materialism, with all its pushes, pulls, affects, and
attachments, one cannot play Never Alone; and the resurgence of this
and other worlds might depend on learning to play.
But, continuing to die early and often in Never Alone, I have not forgotten that spirit helpers favor their kin. Animism cannot be donned
like a magic cape by visitors. Making kin in the ongoing Chthulucene will
be more difficult than that, and even the unwilling heirs of colonizers are
poorly qualified to set conditions for recognition of kinship. Plus, many
contemporary Inuit, including those committed to cultural renewal, are
wary of animism in their own heritage. Staying with the trouble, yearning toward resurgence, requires inheriting hard histories, for everybody,
but not equally and not in the same ways.

Navajo Weaving: Cosmological Performance,
Mathematical Rhythm, Navajo-Churro Sheep, Hózhó
Black Mesa, on it life.
There will be life again, this is what they say.
For this reason they are weaving.73

For my last model system for sympoiesis, in risky propositions I return
to fibers, linking the Crochet Coral Reef to Navajo weaving. Navajo weaving is practiced all over the Navajo Nation, but I will emphasize the weavers of Black Mesa, their sheep, and their alliances.74 It would be a serious
category mistake to call Navajo weaving “art science activism,” which
was a comfortable enough name for the Crochet Coral Reef. Besides bypassing robust and precise Diné namings, both the categories “art” and
“science” continue to do colonizing work in this context. However, it
would also be a serious category error to fence Navajo weaving off from
ongoing mathematical, cosmological, and creative practice that never
fit ongoing colonial definitions of “traditional.” Like the Crochet Coral
Reef, Navajo weaving, especially with the wool of Churro sheep, ties people to animals through patterns of care and response-ability in blasted
places of excess death and threatened ongoingness. As in the Crochet
Coral Reef, the play of collective making and personal invention is everywhere in Navajo fiber work. Both the Crochet Coral Reef and Navajo
weaving exist in a modernizing ecology of gendered and commodifying
structures that elevate ”art” over “craft.” Both the Crochet Coral Reef
and Navajo weaving are done mainly by women, but men also figure in
the webs of thinkers/makers.75 Both the Crochet Coral Reef and Navajo
weaving perform worlds with mathematical vitality that remains invisible in the doxa of scholarship on women’s fiber practices in both settler
and colonized indigenous production. Finally, attuned to a sympoiesis
Sympoiesis


Navajo rug, Two Gray Hills. Weaver unknown.
Photograph by Donna Haraway. Purchased by Rusten
Hogness’s father, John Hogness, in the Navajo Nation
in the 1960s.

of practical coalitions, both the Crochet Coral Reef and Navajo weaving
are at the heart of thinking/making for more livable politics and ecologies in the times of burning and extraction called the Anthropocene
and Capitalocene. In face-to-face and hand-to-hand entanglements, the
Great Barrier Reef and Black Mesa are crocheted and woven together in
cosmological performances to animate the tentacular Chthulucene of a
Thousand Names.
A refrain from Navajo prayers often accompanies a weaver’s work:
“With me there is beauty” (shil hózhó); “in me there is beauty” (shii’
hózhó); “from me beauty radiates” (shits’ áá d óó hózhó).76 Hózhó is a central concept in Navajo cosmology and daily practice. Usual translations
into English are “beauty,” “harmony,” and “order”; but I think a better
translation would emphasize right relations of the world, including human and nonhuman beings, who are of the world as its storied and dynamic substance, not in the world as a container. Disorder, often figured
in the doings of Coyote, disrupts right relations, which must be restored
in ceremony and daily life for proper living to be again possible, for the
person to be restored in hózhó to the People. For the Diné, greed is the
greatest source of disorder; it destroys right relations at their root.
Weaving is a useful practice, to be sure, and an economic one; but,
fundamentally, weaving is also cosmological performance, knotting
proper relationality and connectedness into the warp and weft of the
fabric.77 The geometric patterns of repetition and invention in weaving
are performances of Diné stories and knowledge; the patterns propose
and embody world-making and world-sustaining relations. The dynamic
patterning continues in contemporary weavings, many of which explore
new as well as inherited themes, colors, stories, and fibers.78 Weavings
are individual; they are made by a particular woman and embody her
style and sensibility, recognizable by knowledgeable members of the
community.79 Names of weavers and weavers’ lineages matter, but
weavings are not made to be possessed as property. Neither that nor
the entanglement of the creative personal and the cosmological is a contradiction. The sensible order inherent in the storied cosmos of Changing
Woman, the Holy Twins, Spider Woman, and the other world-making
Holy People is the pattern for right living. Weaving is neither secular nor
religious; it is sensible. It performs and manifests the meaningful lived
connections for sustaining kinship, behavior, relational action—for
hózhó—for humans and nonhumans. Situated worlding is ongoing, neither traditional nor modern.
Navajo weaving relied especially on the so-called rough sheep brought
to the Americas by the Spanish in the sixteenth century and developed
by Navajo herders over a long time as a distinct kind of sheep, named
T’aa Dibei or Navajo-Churro sheep, who are particularly well adapted to
the lands of Diné bikéyah on the Colorado Plateau.80 In Western historical temporalities, Navajo matrifocal pastoralism and farming developed
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with sheep as core companions for living and dying in hózhó. The art of weaving and care of Churro
sheep reciprocally enact Diné relations of natural and cosmic order.
The Diné endured two intense periods of efforts by U.S. officials to
exterminate their Churro sheep. The first such genocide, called Hwéeldi
and effected in 1863 under Kit Carson for the U.S. War Department,
Sympoiesis

was the Long Walk of all the People who could be forcibly rounded up
from Dinetah and marched for hundreds of miles to Bosque Redondo
in New Mexico. The Hwéeldi followed a scorched-earth campaign led by
Carson against the Navajo. Killing of Navajo animals was a central act of
the removal. From the beginning, across the Southwest and West U.S.
modernizers saw Spanish-introduced stock as rough and unimproved.
Exterminating flocks, cutting down peach orchards, and forcing the removal of people to Fort Sumner/Bosque Redondo were, in effect, normal
actions of U.S. colonizing officials pacifying and civilizing an unruly mobile population. The correct name is attempted genocide. Full of suffering and death, this forced march was followed by four years in a prison
camp and then the walk back to their lands. The Hwéeldi is remembered
in the flesh of land and people; it is an “originary” trauma, of the kind
Toni Morrison understood in her novel Paradise.81
The Diné returned to the Navajo reservation on the Colorado Plateau. Churro sheep had been carefully tended by people who escaped
Kit Carson’s soldiers in the deep canyons and remote areas of Dinetah,
including Big Mountain / Dzil ni Staa / Black Mesa. The boundaries of
the reservation extended gradually until the 1930s; and, despite the failure of the U.S. government after the Diné return from Bosque Redondo
to provide promised stock, sheep flocks grew much faster than the human population. This growth was partly driven by the trading post system, which turned wool into blankets to realize value and bought these
blankets by the pound in a system of perpetual indebtedness. To obtain
basic necessities in this system of debt, the Navajo were forced to produce more and more wool from more and more sheep. The traders sold
the weavings in the art and tourist market, but purchased the women’s
weavings as if they were low-value raw wool. Despite the efforts of federal agents, most of the Diné continued to prefer multipurpose, hardy
Churro sheep to merinos and other “improved” breeds. Sheep, goats,
horses, and cattle were all part of the pattern of Navajo pastoralism,
ordered by complex clan and gender relationships. The animals and the
people made kin together.82 Sheep and goats were especially crucial for
women’s abilities to feed and provision their families, as well as to their
authority in the clans.
With intensifying erosion, severe grazing, and sustained drought,
by the 1930s the system was increasingly out of harmony, a condition
recognized by both whites and Navajos. The second intense efforts of
the U.S. government to exterminate Navajo-Churro sheep occurred in
this context; like the first originary trauma, this lethal event can be neither forgotten nor effectively mourned. It bears evil fruit to this day.
Restoring the land, animals, and people to hózhó is an ongoing process
that continues to require continuous weaving. The colonial and capitalist structures of both exterminations have not been dismantled. The
first Churro sheep extermination was conducted by U.S. military men;
the second was also conducted by force, this time by U.S. progressive
agricultural authorities within the ideology and apparatus of the New
Deal. These officials worked within the ecological concept of carrying
capacity, the patriarchal colonial concepts of male-headed households,
and the modernizers’ concepts of progress. Without asking how colonial
economic structures like the unequal wool trade might be a significant
cause of both poverty and ecological damage and judging the erosion of
Navajo lands to be due to overstocking as a biological sort of fact, U.S.
government scientists in the Department of Agriculture and others in
 killed most of the women’s goats, the primary source of subsistence meat for families. White-settler divisions of the world into nature
and culture split Navajo lifeways into colonial apparatuses of ecology
and economics, practiced by different sorts of scientific specialists who
could not systematically think even with each other, much less with
Navajo herders and weavers. In 1935, officials killed vast numbers of
sheep. Churro sheep, many known individually by their people, were
preferentially killed, often in front of their human families. Evident in
photographs, piles of bones from these animal murders were still prominent in the 1970s; and people still dramatically narrated the trauma,
even describing particular animals in their flocks.
Following the killing of about a million sheep and goats (without significant compensation to this day), stocking quotas were imposed, and
collective ownership of land was not recognized. The census by which
stock quotas and permits were allocated recognized only heads of households, who could not be married women, which was a major blow to Diné
matrifocal ways of ordering their relations with land, animals, and each
other. Transhumance was disrupted as land boundaries were redrawn
into Land Management Units, exacerbating erosion as both seasonal
and dynamic rain-pattern-sensitive movements for grazing became
difficult across such boundaries. Besides an act of scientific colonial
arrogance and culpable ignorance, the animal exterminations of the
s effected a profound decapitalization of the whole people, whose
existing poverty, itself linked to the consequences of the first Hwéeldi,
Sympoiesis

was structurally intensified. With the failure to restore the health of
lands, waters, animals, and people in hózhó, balanced pastoralism was
not reconstructed; resurgence on the Colorado Plateau was wounded.
Stock levels and erosion remain a major problem, intensified by deep resentment of forced controls, including colonial conceptual apparatuses
within the Navajo Nation.
In a crisis of drought and multispecies lifeways out of balance in the
s, the opportunity was missed to bring scientific ecological ideas like
carrying capacity into difficult but necessary conversation with Navajo
concepts and practices of hózhó. Neither carrying capacity nor hózhó is
a fixed, deterministic concept; both are relational, contextual, tuned to
some ways of living and dying and not others. It matters what concepts
think concepts, and vice versa; but in this case, colonial structures assured that the important concepts would not be allowed to think each
other, would not be allowed perhaps to issue in something that did not
yet exist in thought for either people, but might be needed by both.
When one system of thinking and practice can only disparage and nullify another in colonial recursions, there can be no sympoiesis and no
hózhó. The consequences of the failure to invent the needed decolonial
conversations ramifies into the present. Since this period, pastoralism
has not been able to support the Diné; and poverty is perpetuated by
the post–World War II wage-based economy in the context of extreme
under- and unemployment, federal subsidies, tourism, and income from
uranium and coal mining.83
However, there is also an extraordinary story of resurgence and partial healing to be told, one that belongs to the Diné and their allies in
the ongoing Chthulucene and the ongoing Diné Bahane’ / Story of the
People / Navajo Creation Story. By 1970, only about 430 Navajo-Churro
sheep survived, scattered across the reservation. The traditional Diné
of Black Mesa and others had protected what sheep they could in remote places. Other Churro sheep survived from a research population
studied from 1934 to 1967 at the Southwest Range and Sheep Breeding
Laboratory at Fort Wingate, New Mexico. When the research project
shut down, 165 Churro sheep were auctioned off in 1967 to a rancher
in Gonzales, California, who used them in a shoot-in-a-barrel safari enterprise for Hollywood notables. Besides their double coat, long fibers,
high-lanolin wool, ability to survive on scrubby pasture, and excellent
mothering skills by the ewes, Churro rams frequently have a double set
of horns that incite hunting fantasists to pay to turn them into tro94 c h a p t e r t h r e e

phies. The story of Navajo-Churro resurgence—with Navajo herders
and weavers; an Anglo scientist committed to Churro sheep and their
people; Navajo and Anglo students; Hispanic and Anglo ranchers; Tarahumara/Rarámuri Indians of the Sierra Madre Occidental of northern
Mexico, who interbred Churro from the Navajo Sheep Project with their
own rough sheep to recover genetic diversity; activists on Black Mesa;
and more—begins at these crossroads. Over decades Diné herders nurtured remnant flocks in spite of the odds, and Buster Naegle, who had
taken over the ranch in Gonzales in 1970 to raise paint horses, donated
six ewes and two four-horned rams to Lyle McNeal, an animal scientist
then at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, as seed animals. In ensuing lifelong
coalitional work, McNeal founded the Navajo Sheep Project in 1977.84
The story of Navajo-Churro restoration is complexly tentacular and
fibrous, braided by many actors and full of obstacles as well as successes.
Collecting sheep on the reservation from Diné cooperating to help rebuild the flocks, Lyle McNeal donated some of the first rams born from
his seed flock in the 1980s to Women in Resistance on Black Mesa. Keeping his nucleus flock and operations alive involved thirteen moves in
four states over twenty-five years with many adventures with the law,
especially private property law. With Diné Churro sheep herders and
weavers including Glenna Begay, Lena Nez, and others, Carol Halberstadt, a poet, activist, and lover of wool from Massachusetts, cofounded
Black Mesa Weavers for Life and Land as a fair trade cooperative association to better the economic and social conditions of Black Mesa
Diné through supporting sheep herding, wool buys, and weaving.85 A
Navajo-Churro flock has been established at the Diné College in Tsaile,
Arizona, for teaching. Diné be’iína / The Navajo Lifeway was founded
in 1991 to nurture community-based partnerships to restore economy
and culture. The college hosts the Dibé be’iína / Sheep Is Life celebration
every summer.86 Churro are central to cultural renewal through weaving
and taking care of sheep. Reconnecting generations broken by boarding schools and forced stock exterminations and encouraging Navajo
language use among the young are also tied to these sheep.87 Kosher
Navajo-Churro sheep jerky, guard llamas, the American Livestock Breeds
Conservancy, the Navajo-Churro Sheep Association, the Agricultural Research Service National Center for Genetic Resources Preservation, the
Slow Food Foundation for Biodiversity, Two Grey Hills Trading Post,
the Teec Nos Pos 
its regional wool-processing facility, the
Ganados del Valle Hispanic agricultural development corporation, Tierra
Sympoiesis

Wool and Los Ojos Handweavers, the Crownpoint Auction, and Heifer
International are all involved in diverse configurations.88
Not least, the sheep themselves are active participants in the interlaced relational worlds. Like all sheep, they recognize hundreds of faces;
they know their people and their land.89 Weaving is cosmological performance, relational worlding, with human and nonhuman fibers from the
Holy People, ordinary human beings, plants, soils, waters, and sheep.
The critters are critical to taking care of country, to environmental justice, to robust ecosystems for humans and nonhumans, to hózhó. It matters which beings recognize beings.
So the sheep lead back to Black Mesa and to a concluding sympoiesis
with the activists—the thinkers/makers—of the Black Mesa Water Coalition (bmwc). Supporting the weavers, herders, and sheep of the region,
bmwc partners with Diné be’iína and holds wool buys; they even partner with a sheep-farming outfit in Maine called Peace Fleece.90 bmwc is
thoroughly entangled with sheep and their people across damaged lands
and blasted histories. But my reason for tying the threads of cosmological performance and continuous weaving together through bmwc is
grounded in coal, water, indigenous environmental justice movements,
and surging coalitions for Just Transition toward still possible worlds in
urgent times. Probably still possible. Barely still possible. Still possible if
we render each other capable of worlding and reworlding for flourishing.
I want to propose the Black Mesa Water Coalition as a sympoietic model
for learning to stay with the trouble together, for hózhó.
The bmwc was founded in 2001 by a group of young intertribal, interethnic people, mostly students at the time, committed to addressing
water depletion, natural resource exploitation, and health in Navajo
and Hopi communities.91 Quickly focusing on Peabody Energy, they
were central to the actions that closed down the Black Mesa Mine and
Mohave Generating Station in 2006. But that was the beginning, not
the end. The coalition sees Black Mesa as a critical place for learning
to transition out of coal-based economies and ecologies and into abundant solar and other renewable power, situated on damaged lands, as a
needed practice for multispecies environmental justice. Black Mesa itself
is not just any place; within Navajo cosmology Black Mesa is the mother
encircled by the four sacred mountains. The waters are the mother’s
blood, and coal is her liver. That condensed Diné geo-anatomy is only an
indication of the corporeal relational cosmology of place that is utterly
illegible to Peabody Energy—and to settler colonialism more broadly,
to this day. My colleague Anna Tsing talks about “worlds worth fighting
for”; Black Mesa is such a world.92
The bmwc’s Just Transition Initiative, beginning in 2005, is a comprehensive vision and practice for building on the strengths of local
people, culture, and land, in alliance with many partners, to make resurgence on Black Mesa and beyond a reality. Pilot projects for restoring
regional watersheds and for economic development, the vision and work
toward a Black Mesa Solar Project, the Food Security Project, the Navajo
Wool Market Project, the Green Economy Project, and the Climate Justice Solutions Project are all part of the bmwc’s work. These activists
aim to develop a strong regional, integrated environmental and social
justice movement led by indigenous communities and organizations, as
well as to ally with the worldwide Climate Justice Alliance.93 These are
big, important ideas and actions; these kinds of continuous weaving are
at the heart of staying with the trouble in a damaged world. Continuing
to be led by young adults within a multigenerational web, the bmwc
proposes the sort of resurgence that can face the originary, repeating
traumas of history without denial and without cynicism or despair. In
my idiom, the Black Mesa Water Coalition is a strong tentacle in the
surging Chthulucene.
Conclusion: Tying Off the Threads

We relate, know, think, world, and tell stories through and with other
stories, worlds, knowledges, thinkings, yearnings. So do all the other
critters of Terra, in all our bumptious diversity and category-breaking
speciations and knottings. Other words for this might be materialism,
evolution, ecology, sympoiesis, history, situated knowledges, cosmological performance, science art worldings, or animism, complete with all
the contaminations and infections conjured by each of these terms. Critters are at stake in each other in every mixing and turning of the terran
compost pile. We are compost, not posthuman; we inhabit the humusities, not the humanities. Philosophically and materially, I am a compostist, not a posthumanist. Critters—human and not—become-with
each other, compose and decompose each other, in every scale and register of time and stuff in sympoietic tangling, in ecological evolutionary
developmental earthly worlding and unworlding.
This 
with Lynn Margulis’s proposition of symbiogenesis and segued into the biologies that make an extended evolutionary
Sympoiesis

synthesis necessary to thinking well about multispecies living and dying
on earth at every scale of time and space. The involutionary momentum
of a vanishing bee and its faithful orchid enfolded the EcoEvoDevo biologies into four naturalsocial ecologies of a damaged planet. Actual places,
these are worlds worth fighting for; and each has nourished brave, smart,
generative coalitions of artists/scientists/activists across dangerous historical divisions. The biologies, arts, and politics need each other; with
involutionary momentum, they entice each other to thinking/making in
sympoiesis for more livable worlds that I call the Chthulucene.94
Isabelle Stengers’s sense of cosmopolitics gives me courage.95 Including human people, critters are in each other’s presence, or better, inside each other’s tubes, folds, and crevices, insides and outsides, and
not quite either. The decisions and transformations so urgent in our
times for learning again, or for the first time, how to become less deadly,
more response-able, more attuned, more capable of surprise, more able
to practice the arts of living and dying well in multispecies symbiosis,
sympoiesis, and symanimagenesis on a damaged planet, must be made
without guarantees or the expectation of harmony with those who are
not oneself—and not safely other, either. Neither One nor Other, that
is who we all are and always have been. All of us must become more ontologically inventive and sensible within the bumptious holobiome that
earth turns out to be, whether called Gaia or a Thousand Other Names.


Kin
Anthropocene, Capitalocene,
Plantationocene, Chthulucene

There is no question that anthropogenic processes have had planetary
effects, in inter/intra-action with other processes and species, for as
long as our species can be identified (a few tens of thousand years); and
agriculture has been huge (a few thousand years). Of course, from the
start the greatest planetary terraformers (and reformers) of all have
been and still are bacteria and their kin, also in inter/intra-action of
myriad kinds (including with people and their practices, technological
and otherwise).1 The spread of seed-dispersing plants millions of years
before human agriculture was a planet-changing development, and so
were many other revolutionary evolutionary ecological developmental
historical events.
People joined the bumptious fray early and dynamically, even before
they/we were critters who were later named Homo sapiens. But I think
the issues about naming relevant to the Anthropocene, Plantationocene,
or Capitalocene have to do with scale, rate/speed, synchronicity, and
complexity. The constant questions when considering systemic phenomena have to be, When do changes in degree become changes in kind?
and What are the effects of bioculturally, biotechnically, biopolitically,
historically situated people (not Man) relative to, and combined with,
the effects of other species assemblages and other biotic/abiotic forces?

No species, not even our own arrogant one pretending to be good individuals in so-called modern Western scripts, acts alone; assemblages of
organic species and of abiotic actors make history, the evolutionary kind
and the other kinds too.
But is there an inflection point of consequence that changes the name
of the “game” of life on earth for everybody and everything? It’s more
than climate change; it’s also extraordinary burdens of toxic chemistry,
mining, nuclear pollution, depletion of lakes and rivers under and above
ground, ecosystem simplification, vast genocides of people and other
critters, et cetera, et cetera, in systemically linked patterns that threaten
major system collapse after major system collapse after major system
collapse. Recursion can be a drag.
Anna Tsing in a recent paper called “Feral Biologies” suggests that the
inflection point between the Holocene and the Anthropocene might be
the wiping out of most of the refugia from which diverse species assemblages (with or without people) can be reconstituted after major events
(like desertification, or clear cutting, or, or, . . . ).2 This is kin to the
World-Ecology Research Network coordinator Jason Moore’s arguments
that cheap nature is at an end; cheapening nature cannot work much
longer to sustain extraction and production in and of the contemporary world because most of the reserves of the earth have been drained,
burned, depleted, poisoned, exterminated, and otherwise exhausted.3
Vast investments and hugely creative and destructive technology can
drive back the reckoning, but cheap nature really is over. Anna Tsing
argues that the Holocene was the long period when refugia, places of
refuge, still existed, even abounded, to sustain reworlding in rich cultural and biological diversity. Perhaps the outrage meriting a name like
Anthropocene is about the destruction of places and times of refuge for
people and other critters. I along with others think the Anthropocene is
more a boundary event than an epoch, like the K-Pg boundary between
the Cretaceous and the Paleogene.4 The Anthropocene marks severe discontinuities; what comes after will not be like what came before. I think
our job is to make the Anthropocene as short/thin as possible and to
cultivate with each other in every way imaginable epochs to come that
can replenish refuge.
Right now, the earth is full of refugees, human and not, without
refuge.
So I think a big new name, actually more than one name, is warranted—hence Anthropocene, Plantationocene,5 and Capitalocene (An100



dreas Malm’s and Jason Moore’s term before it was mine).6 I also insist
that we need a name for the dynamic ongoing symchthonic forces and
powers of which people are a part, within which ongoingness is at stake.
Maybe, but only maybe, and only with intense commitment and collaborative work and play with other terrans, flourishing for rich multispecies
assemblages that include people will be possible. I am calling all this the
Chthulucene—past, present, and to come.7 These real and possible timespaces are not named after sf writer H. P. Lovecraft’s misogynist racialnightmare monster Cthulhu (note spelling difference), but rather after
the diverse earthwide tentacular powers and forces and collected things
with names like Naga, Gaia, Tangaroa (burst from water-full Papa), Terra,
Haniyasu-hime, Spider Woman, Pachamama, Oya, Gorgo, Raven, A’akuluujjusi, and many many more. “My” Chthulucene, even burdened with
its problematic Greek-ish rootlets, entangles myriad temporalities and
spatialities and myriad intra-active entities-in-assemblages—including
the more-than-human, other-than-human, inhuman, and human-ashumus. Even rendered in an American English-language text like this
one, Naga, Gaia, Tangaroa, Medusa, Spider Woman, and all their kin are
some of the many thousand names proper to a vein of sf that Lovecraft
could not have imagined or embraced—namely, the webs of speculative
fabulation, speculative feminism, science fiction, and scientific fact.8 It
matters which stories tell stories, which concepts think concepts. Mathematically, visually, and narratively, it matters which figures figure figures, which systems systematize systems.
All the thousand names are too big and too small; all the stories are
too big and too small. As Jim Clifford taught me, we need stories (and
theories) that are just big enough to gather up the complexities and keep
the edges open and greedy for surprising new and old connections.9
One way to live and die well as mortal critters in the Chthulucene
is to join forces to reconstitute refuges, to make possible partial and
robust biological-cultural-political-technological recuperation and recomposition, which must include mourning irreversible losses. Thom
van Dooren and Vinciane Despret taught me that.10 There are so many
losses already, and there will be many more. Renewed generative flourishing cannot grow from myths of immortality or failure to become-with
the dead and the extinct. There is a lot of work for Orson Scott Card’s
Speaker for the Dead.11 And even more for Ursula Le Guin’s worlding in
Always Coming Home.
I am a compostist, not a posthumanist: we are all compost, not postMaking Kin

human. The boundary that is the Anthropocene/Capitalocene means
many things, including that immense irreversible destruction is really
in train, not only for the 11 billion or so people who will be on earth near
the end of the twenty-first century, but for myriads of other critters too.
(The incomprehensible but sober number of around 11 billion will only
hold if current worldwide birth rates of human babies remain low; if
they rise again, all bets are off.) The edge of extinction is not just a metaphor; system collapse is not a thriller. Ask any refugee of any species.
The Chthulucene needs at least one slogan (of course, more than one);
still shouting “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival,” “Run Fast, Bite Hard,” and
“Shut Up and Train,” I propose “Make Kin Not Babies!” Making—and
recognizing—kin is perhaps the hardest and most urgent part.12 Feminists of our time have been leaders in unraveling the supposed natural
necessity of ties between sex and gender, race and sex, race and nation,
class and race, gender and morphology, sex and reproduction, and reproduction and composing persons (our debts here are due especially to
Melanesians, in alliance with Marilyn Strathern and her ethnographer
kin).13 If there is to be multispecies ecojustice, which can also embrace
diverse human people, it is high time that feminists exercise leadership
in imagination, theory, and action to unravel the ties of both genealogy
and kin, and kin and species.
Bacteria and fungi abound to give us metaphors; but, metaphors
aside (good luck with that!), we have a mammalian job to do, with our
biotic and abiotic sympoietic collaborators, colaborers. We need to make
kin symchthonically, sympoetically. Who and whatever we are, we need
to make-with—become-with, compose-with—the earth-bound (thanks
for that term, Bruno Latour–in-Anglophone-mode).14
We, human people everywhere, must address intense, systemic urgencies; yet so far, as Kim Stanley Robinson put it in 2312, we are living
in times of “The Dithering” (in this sf narrative, lasting from 2005 to
—too optimistic?), a “state of indecisive agitation.”15 Perhaps the
Dithering is a more apt name than either the Anthropocene or Capitalocene! The Dithering will be written into earth’s rocky strata, indeed already is written into earth’s mineralized layers. Symchthonic ones don’t
dither; they compose and decompose, which are both dangerous and
promising practices. To say the least, human hegemony is not a symchthonic affair. As ecosexual artists Beth Stephens and Annie Sprinkle
say on a sticker they had made for me, composting is so hot!
My purpose is to make “kin” mean something other/more than en102



tities tied by ancestry or genealogy. The gently defamiliarizing move
might seem for a while to be just a mistake, but then (with luck) appear
as correct all along. Kin making is making persons, not necessarily as individuals or as humans. I was moved in college by Shakespeare’s punning
between kin and kind—the kindest were not necessarily kin as family;
making kin and making kind (as category, care, relatives without ties
by birth, lateral relatives, lots of other echoes) stretch the imagination
and can change the story. Marilyn Strathern taught me that “relatives”
in British English were originally “logical relations” and only became
“family members” in the seventeenth century—this is definitely among
the factoids I love.16 Go outside English, and the wild multiplies.
I think that the stretch and recomposition of kin are allowed by the
fact that all earthlings are kin in the deepest sense, and it is past time to
practice better care of kinds-as-assemblages (not species one at a time).
Kin is an assembling sort of word. All critters share a common “flesh,”
laterally, semiotically, and genealogically. Ancestors turn out to be very
interesting strangers; kin are unfamiliar (outside what we thought was
family or gens), uncanny, haunting, active.17
Too much for a tiny slogan, I know! Still, try. Over a couple hundred
years from now, maybe the human people of this planet can again be
numbered 2 or 3 billion or so, while all along the way being part of increasing well-being for diverse human beings and other critters as means
and not just ends.
So, make kin, not babies! It matters how kin generate kin.18

Making Kin


in Urine
DES and Premarin
in Multispecies Response-ability

Cyborg Littermates

Cyborgs are kin, whelped in the litter of post–World War II information technologies and globalized digital bodies, politics, and cultures
of human and not-human sorts. Cyborgs are not machines in just any
sense, nor are they machine-organism hybrids. In fact, they are not hybrids at all. They are, rather, imploded entities, dense material semiotic
“things”—articulated string figures of ontologically heterogeneous, historically situated, materially rich, virally proliferating relatings of particular sorts, not all the time everywhere, but here, there, and in between,
with consequences. Particular sorts of historically situated machines
signaled by the words information and system play their part in cyborg
living and dying. Particular sorts of historically situated organisms, signaled by the idioms of labor systems, energetics, and communication,
play their part. Finally, particular sorts of historically situated human
beings, becoming-with the practices and artifacts of technoscience, play
their part. Characterized by partial connections, the parts do not add up
to any whole; but they do add up to worlds of nonoptional, stratified,
webbed, and unfinished living and dying, appearing and disappearing.
Cyborgs are constitutively full of multiscalar, multitemporal, multima-

terial critters of both living and nonliving persuasions.1 Cyborgs matter
in terran worlding.
But cyborgs are critters in a queer litter, not the Chief Figure of Our
Times. Queer here means not committed to reproduction of kind and
having bumptious relations with futurities. Irreducible to cyborgs, the
litter interests me, the particular kin and kind nursed on the fluid and
solid effluvia of terra in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. I return to “my” cyborg in this litter in order to relay the string
figures—the speculative fabulations, the scientific facts, the science fictions, and the speculative feminisms—to whatever sorts of tentacular
grippers will receive the pattern to keep living and dying well possible
in “our times.” Made up of an aging California dog, pregnant mares on
the western Canadian prairies, human women who came to be known
as des daughters, lots of menopausal U.S. women, and assorted other
players in the story of “synthetic” and “natural” estrogens, the litter
for this 
decanted from bodies awash in a particular pungent
fluid—urine. Waste and resource, out-of-place urine from particular
female bodies is the salty ocean needed for my tale. Leaks and eddies
are everywhere. These leaks and eddies might help open passages for a
praxis of care and response—response-ability—in ongoing multispecies
worlding on a wounded terra.
DES for Hot Peppers

In October 2011 my twelve-year-old canine friend and lifelong sports
partner Cayenne, aka Hot Pepper, started taking a notorious, industrially produced, nonsteroidal, synthetic estrogen called des (diethylstilbesterol) to deal with urinary leakage.2 Perhaps I should not write she
“started taking,” but, rather, “I started feeding her as an occasional latenight treat, following her last pee, a luscious, slippery, Earth Balance®
margarine-coated capsule of des.” Plato gave us the tones in the inextricable ambiguities of his pharmakon: cure and poison; care, curare;
remedy, toxin; treat, threat. Aging spayed bitches like Cayenne and postmenopausal women like me often could use a hormonal tightening of
slack smooth muscles in the urethra to keep socially unacceptable leaks
plugged up. The term estrogen deficiency is a tough one for feminists
like me, marinated at a young age in the women’s health movements
and feminist science studies, to pronounce. But the fact is that a few
extra dabs of estrogens do some handy jobs in aging mammalian female
Awash in Urine

bodies—at a price, of course, in many currencies of living and dying.
Granted, the adrenal glands still secrete some estrogens for those of us
with missing or dried-up ovaries, but output is pretty low and smooth
muscle can get pretty flaccid.
But giving this beloved, elder, nonreproducing dog to whom I am responsible even very low-dose and infrequent diethylstilbesterol caused
acute des Anxiety Syndrome in me. My blood pressure rose higher than
the high canine blood pressure that motivated changing urine-plugging
drugs for Cayenne in the first place. Even if I could keep my critique of
biocapital in a sealed flask, my feminist biopolitical juices started oozing
from every pore, leaking all over my obligations to our dog. Rusten, my
male human spouse, was drawn deeply into this mammalian female well
of worry, and not just because neither one of us much wanted to sleep
in the urinary wet spot if estrogen-deprived urethral smooth muscle
were left unattended in the nocturnal hours in our species-queer connubial bed. Cross-species kinship has consequences. Our now shared
des Anxiety Syndrome had to be treated immediately by our excellent
primary care veterinarian, who did the service of presenting us with scientific studies and her own history of practice with low-dose, minimumfrequency des for elder dogs; this was the “talking cure” we needed—a
high dose of reason, evidence, and story, taken weekly with uncanny
and unruly molecules. Still, my vet herself is too young to have been
infected with my kind of terror of des. Besides, she can’t possibly be
the daughter of a woman who took des sometime between 1940 and
, when a report in the New England Journal of Medicine tied des to a
nasty vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma in girls and young women who
had been exposed to this drug in utero. Otherwise, my vet would surely
do more than remember what I am afraid of. A talking cure might not
be enough.
Even though a double-blind study done at the University of Chicago
in the early 1950s showed no benefit from des for sustaining pregnancies in women, and even though by the late 1960s six of seven leading
human gynecological textbooks stated that des did not prevent miscarriages, the drug continued to be prescribed frequently over three
decades for averting miscarriage and also for an almost comical (except
it was not funny) host of other “indications,” both on and off label. Ultimately, probably 2 million women in the United States alone took des
during pregnancy. Probably every reader of this 
some
of the offspring of these pregnancies, but may or may not know their
often hidden suffering. I do—both people and their suffering, or a little
bit of it—and the extraordinary psychologist-scholar-friend who told
me about her des history when I told her about Cayenne performed
just the generative acts of “becoming-with” that have occupied my soul
since writing When Species Meet, or really since the “Cyborg Manifesto.”
My human friend, this human des daughter, was already an avid, if dogallergic, admirer of Cayenne; she is one of the humans who, when she
visits, induces enthusiastic canine play-solicitation performances from
my very nonpromiscuous dog. But suddenly and oddly, their unexpected
des kinship threw them transversally, not genealogically, into a litter
together differently. Separated by allergies, they were joined in the flesh
by a disreputable nonsteroidal estrogen. It is clear to me that human
Sheila has assigned herself to keep a baleful queer sisterly eye on those
gelcaps I give dog Cayenne. That kindly critical lateral eye will complement the regular blood tests Cayenne will now have to endure to keep
track of the health of her blood-forming cells and immune functions.3 A
good sphincter can be hard to find.
For very good reasons tied to the history of the women’s health movements and to action, finally, by agencies like the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, these days des is a controlled substance you can get only
(or mainly) for nonhumans. In the 1990s, the only approved indication
for des in human beings was treatment of advanced prostate cancer
in men and of advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women, and
that use has been superseded. The last U.S. manufacturer of des, Eli
Lilly, stopped making and marketing the no-longer-profitable drug in
. That’s why Cayenne and I found ourselves at a homeopathic and
compounding pharmacy in 2011.4
Diethylstilbesterol was first synthesized in 1938 in a laboratory of the
Oxford University in the waning heroic days of the history of endocrinology. Those were the days when one might still find eminent biochemists prowling around nonhuman animal slaughter floors collecting many
pounds of ovaries, pancreas, testes, adrenal glands, kidneys, pituitaries
(try collecting pounds or kilograms of pituitary gland!), and other organs
and tissues from many species to ferret back to the lab to extract and
then chemically and physiologically characterize the first few precious
micrograms of natural steroids or other potent hormones. Stalking the
newly dead in graves of the European Renaissance for human bodies to
dissect has a long uncanny laboratory history into the present. Currentday laboratory mice and their archived and curated parts would probably
Awash in Urine

be our best informants for today’s stories of organs without bodies and
life after death. The 1930s were still the days when biochemical laboratories were accustomed to distilling tiny amounts of chemical gold from
the dross of vats of urine and other bodily fluids, human and not.
des did not come from these material sources, but it inhabits the
same cross-hatched histories, where what counts as natural or artificial
was (and is) constantly morphing in the study and production of things
called “sex hormones.” No wonder biologist feminists like me find our
politics and psyches relentlessly and variously material in ways that Foucault hardly dreamed of. It’s those laboratory wet spots in nighttime
knowledge making that get feminists roused.
So in my town, you purchase the expensive, carcinogenic, immunesuppressing, anemia-inducing, smooth muscle–plumping molecules
known as des in snowy powder form in gelcaps from a homeopathic and
compounding pharmacy, Lauden Integrative Pharmacy. “Compounding
pharmacy” sounds so early twentieth-century to my ear, but I can see
that when Big Pharma no longer makes or sells a still useful molecule, one
that is no better than she should be, the up-to-the-minute, seemingly
old-fashioned drugstore gets the leavings. Lauden Integrative Pharmacy
sells lots of homeopathic substances for both human and more-thanhuman animals. I paid for Cayenne’s des capsules at a counter draped
in the colors, posters, and icons of “Western” and “Eastern” alternative
medicine, both ancient and modern.
To say this scene is emblematic of the mixed structures and affects
of biomedical technoscience is an understatement. Lauden formulates
many of the chemotherapeutic and other drugs prescribed by the veterinary specialist clinic where Cayenne and I were under the care of a fine
consulting internist and cardiac specialist for her early mitral valve disease (mvd). mvd is the reason my fast and sporty Hot Pepper’s moderately high blood pressure was not acceptable, and so a new diagnosis of
mvd is the reason we changed prescriptions from a drug she had gobbled happily for a few years, called Propolin® (ppa or phenylpropanolamine, “for oral use in dogs only”), to des. ppa does a fine job pumping
up urethral smooth muscle and keeping urine in its hygienic reservoirs
for properly timed release in assigned places. But unfortunately ppa is
indiscriminate and tightens arterial smooth muscle too, thereby raising
blood pressure—not a good idea in dogs with early heart disease. For
better and for worse, estrogens are more discriminating in the tissues
they home in on. Anyone with breasts—or breast cancer—knows this.
But it’s the multispecies business in the compounding pharmacy that
really drew my attention. When I get an anxiety syndrome, I am thrown
into compulsive scholarly antics, and des Anxiety Syndrome was no exception. Urine, urethras, damaged heart valves, “abnormal pregnancy
outcomes,” and cancer-ravaged breasts and uteruses have provided the
cross-species organic stuff of the story. So far, my tale has emphasized
a litter of critters made up of dogs, humans, and slaughtered animals,
mainly pigs, sheep, and cows. It’s that last category that will take me
into the last stanza of the des recitative and plump out the litter a bit
before we get to my next starring estrogen molecules for remaking kin
and kind.
des was the molecule used in the first experimental, scientific demonstration of successful hormonal growth promotion in cattle in the history of those animal-human relations called agriculture.5 Although in
 researchers at Purdue University demonstrated des-induced growth
promotion in heifers, Purdue did not pursue patent protection for the
cattle and sheep work that its investigators carried out. These agricultural scientists used des because implants had already been formulated
for use in poultry, those feathered workhorses in so much of the history of factory farming. The fda banned des for growth promotion in
chickens and lambs in 1959 and in all animal feed in 1979. But fromto the early 1970s des was used widely as a growth promoter in the
beef industry. Agricultural industry and university agricultural science
(especially Iowa State College) were close partners in research for this
use. The agricultural-industrial complex was in its postwar adolescent
growth spurt. Iowa State and W. Burroughs filed for a patent on oral
des for cattle in 1953, granted in 1956. In 1972 the fda removed oral des
from the market for use in cattle (1973 for implants). des residues found
in bovine livers and human des daughters converged to take the drug off
the legal agricultural market, although stories of illegal use still surface.
But the core story here is not des as such; the big story is the relentless
rise of hormonal growth promoters of the next molecular generations
that are integral to the ecosystem-destroying, human and animal labortransforming, multispecies soul-mutilating, epidemic-friendly, corn
monocrop-promoting, cross-species heartbreaking, feedlot cattle industries. All of a sudden, I cannot forget that in 1947 heifers too became des
daughters, and the bovine sons followed in droves. Cyborg’s enhanced
litter is outsized. Daughter of a dog family known for prowess in cattle
herding before the times of des, my dog dribbling urine spots leads inAwash in Urine

exorably to feedlots, slaughterhouses, and unmet agricultural animal,
human, and ecological well-being and advocacy obligations around the
world. Response-ability yet to come, again. In companion species worlding, becoming-with makes strong demands on the littermates.
Conjugating Kin with Premarin

Conjugating is about yoking together; conjugal love is yoked love; conjugated chemical compounds join together two or more constituents.
People conjugate in public spaces; they yoke themselves together transversally and across time and space to make significant things happen.
Students conjugate verbs to explore the yoked inflections of person,
number, gender, kind, voice, mood, position, tense, and aspect in a field
of material-semiotic meaning making. To learn about recursive yoking,
conjugate “to conjugate.” Now, do that with estrogens. Conjunctivitis is
an irritation of the mucous membrane lining the inner surface of the
eyelid. What might conjunctivitis mean in the odoriferous fluid mixtures
of conjugated estrogens, such as the motley of naturally occurring but
nonhuman estrogens purified from pregnant mare’s urine to make very
profitable pills for Big Pharma? And also to give lots of human women
the means to decide whether or not they will bear children, endure hot
flashes, lose bone mass, or add to or subtract from their risk of cancer
or heart disease? Or, to find that “our bodies ourselves” includes mares
and their foals (and a few stallions), with all the political and ethical consequences of that conjugation? Conjugated estrogens are about yoking
molecules and species to each other in consequential ways. In the Moby
Thesaurus, one mouth-watering synonym of conjugate is conglobulate;
that is what I will try to do with horses, humans, urine, and hearts conjugated with Premarin.
Once upon a time, when I thought I needed estrogen during menopause—to stave off familial heart disease, of all things—I relied on the
animal-industrial complex, repeated pregnancies and long-term confinement of mares, and natural conjugated estrogens called Premarin
(compounded with a progestin into hrt, Hormone Replacement Therapy) extracted from equine urine.6 Now I give my dog a synthetic estrogen with a terrible human and bovine history to control her urinary
incontinence, for the sake of her heart—and her indoor way of life. (It
works.) Oh, Cayenne, dog of my heart, a human taste for irony will not
get us through these companion species relationships, these meals of
situated molecules and required response-ability yet to come. Somehow,
a feminist science studies scholar and lifelong animal lover, my menopausal self failed to know much about the pregnant mares and their
disposable foals.
Did I forget, never know, not look—or just not care? What kind of
conjunctivitis was that? Social movements for animal flourishing had
noticed those horses and made a very effective fuss about it, and these
movements were full of feminist women and men. Why not me too? Was
it only after it turned out that hrt probably harmed my heart rather
than guarded it that the horses came into my ken? I don’t remember.
Marx understood all about how privileged positions block knowledge
of the conditions of one’s privilege. So did the innovators of feminist
standpoint theory, the founders of the women’s health movements, and
the thinkers and activists shaping movements for animal flourishing—
that is, my friends, comrades, and colleagues—well before I was in
menopause. Still, I managed not to know about the conditions of work
for those adult horses for a very long time, much less know about the
fate of the excess foals. I ate equine conjugated estrogens; I drank pooled
mares’ urine, literally; but I did not conjugate well with the horses
themselves. Shame is a prod to lifelong rethinking and recrafting one’s
accountabilities!
A collaboration between a Canadian pharmaceutical company and
an endocrinologist at McGill University led to the development inof the first orally active, water-soluble, conjugated estrogen, called Emmenin®.7 Emmenin® was extracted from the urine of Canadian women
in late stages of their pregnancies, but supply considerations set the
researchers and company to looking for a more copious and available
mammalian source. Even if they were paid and desperate, pregnant
women would not stay attached to collection bags for long, nor did
they pee nearly enough to supply their sisters with hormones. German
researchers at the time were studying water-soluble estrogens in the
urine of pregnant zebras and horses in the Berlin zoo, and by 1939 the
pharmaceutical company Ayerst had established a method to get a stable concentrate from pregnant mares’ urine. The result of an extraction
and concentration process with more than one hundred steps, Premarin
was ready to be marketed in Canada in 1941. The horses, confined in
stalls for months at a time attached to collection bags, were originally
contract workers on Quebec farms, and the product was manufactured
in Montreal. Eventually, high demand issuing from the growing practice
Awash in Urine

of prescribing hormones for menopause, coupled with the history of
successive buyouts among the pharmaceutical companies, resulted in
production moving to the expansive Canadian western prairies, with a
new processing plant in Manitoba.
About a decade after I started menopause in the late 1980s, byPremarin became the number-one prescribed drug in the United States,
reaching the sales figure of $2 billion by 2002.8 Used in over three thousand scientific investigations by 2011, this drug complex remains the
most studied estrogen therapy in the world. Definitively by 2002, strong
data gathered in the context of the Women’s Health Initiative showed
that not only did estrogens not prevent heart disease; they were also
positively correlated with increased incidences of blood clots, strokes,
heart attack, and breast cancer. Sales of Premarin dropped fast—by a
lot. Redundant equine workers went to slaughter—lots of them. Dependent contract farmers were put out of business. Drug companies scrambled. Women worried; I know.
However reduced in volume, harvesting of pregnant mare urine remains a worldwide business, and Premarin remains a much-prescribed
and profitable product. Today Pfizer, which bought out Wyeth-Ayerest
in 2009, contracts with about two dozen horse ranches, mainly in western Canada. In 2003, there were over four hundred Wyeth-Ayerest contracted pmu farms in Manitoba. With industry reorganization in the
wake of the crisis in Premarin prescriptions after 2002, profit per pmu
mare went up between 2003 and 2007—a lot. The North American
Equine Ranching Information Council (naeric) is a committed, sophisticated industry group that presents in its best light the history and
contemporary practices of pmu farming.9 The naeric website includes
a “four seasons” description, with beautiful pictures, of the annual life
cycle of the horses on idyllic-looking farms said to be thoroughly regulated and inspected for animal welfare. This site narrates that, from autumn through early spring, mares are confined in their own “comfortable” stalls attached to a “lightweight, flexible pouch that is suspended
from the ceiling by rubber suspension lines” that allow a full range of
motion, including lying down. Horses have access to sufficient water—
a major change from the period before reform, when the demand for
concentrated urine trumped equine thirst, with predictable medical
consequences for the horses. Put together by international veterinary
and welfare groups which inspect equine ranches, and available online
from the naeric site, the “Equine Veterinarians’ Consensus Report on
the Care of Horses on pmu Ranches” concluded that numerous reforms
after an investigation in 1995 led to major improvements in the lives of
the horses. “The public should be assured that the care and welfare of
the horses involved in the production of an estrogen replacement medication is good, and is closely monitored.”10
Onsite analysis on several farms by HorseAid in 1999 found conditions much less satisfactory than naeric claims, even if one grants that
the guidelines, which leave the question of exercise to the discretion of
pressed farmers with no indoor exercise facilities in a northern plains
winter, are good enough for horses.11 Confined mares stand around too
much, eat too much, get fat, and develop bad feet—sounds like a lot of
working females across species to me. With very little room to make
costly changes in care practices, contract farmers are at the low end of
the financial food chain generated by pregnant mares’ urine, just as they
are for broiler chickens or other animal industrial products.
By 2011, about 2000 naeric foals per year were born on twenty-six
pmu farms, including draft, light horse, and sport breeds. The foals
were sold mostly to families and show barns. About forty-nine thousand
horses have been registered with naeric since 1998. Better-bred foals
are more profitable, so fewer are slaughtered or enter the rescue and
adoption apparatus. These days, ranchers collecting pregnant mares’
urine “rely on selling foals as much as they rely upon the urine collected
from the pregnant mares. Many of these farms utilize websites and
forms of promotion identical to non-Premarin-related horse breeders,
and, in nearly all ways, are indistinguishable from the average breeder
of equines.”12
The reforms promoted by naeric came into being because of activist
animal rights, women’s health, and horse advocacy groups. Beginning
with a hands-on, on-site study in 1986, HorseAid was the first animal
rights organization to investigate conditions on pmu farms and the risks
to women from hrt medication, publishing its damning results first in
print in 1988 and then in 1994 on the Internet, with graphic images and
details about farm and industry practices and human medical data.13
In 1995, seven years after HorseAid’s 1988 report, naeric formed to
advocate for reform and humane treatment of pmu horses. But reform
was not and is not the ultimate goal for HorseAid or organizations like
the International Fund for Horses. Both groups continue to argue for
shutting down all pmu farming, where months-long confinement of
pregnant horses, however “comfortable” (i.e., in a box 8 feet wide by 3.5
Awash in Urine

feet wide by 5 feet high for six months), and slaughtering mares who
fail to become pregnant, continue.14 The availability of a wider range of
laboratory-synthesized and plant-derived hormones makes arguments
to end pmu production harder to evade. Taking account of all pmu farms
in 2002, HorseAid estimated that about fifteen thousand “excess” foals
went to slaughter. Reflecting Premarin sales declines since 2002, cuts
in contracts to farms, and a more market-oriented foal production, the
number now is much lower, but could be zero.15
HorseAid was always clear about its advocacy both for women’s
health and the well-being of horses, and its reports also paid attention to
the difficulties of farms and farmers in an agribusiness system in which
making a living by farming has become brutal.That fact, of course, does
not address what would make raising horses on the northern prairies
viable for economic and ecological human-animal well-being, and that
should not be an idle goal.
Viral Response-ability

There is no innocence in these kin stories, and the accountabilities are
extensive and permanently unfinished. Indeed, responsibility in and for
the worldings in play in these stories requires the cultivation of viral
response-abilities, carrying meanings and materials across kinds in order to infect processes and practices that might yet ignite epidemics of
multispecies recuperation and maybe even flourishing on terra in ordinary times and places. Call that utopia; call that inhabiting the despised
places; call that touch; call that the rapidly mutating virus of hope, or
the less rapidly changing commitment to staying with the trouble. My
slogan from the 1980s, “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival,” still resonates, in
a cacophony of sound and fury emanating from a very big litter whelped
in shared but nonmimetic suffering and issuing in movements for flourishing yet to come.
In my des story, tracking Cayenne’s urine spots to out-of-the-way
places brought us into a still-expanding conglobulation of interlinked
research, marketing, medical and veterinary, activist, agricultural, and
scholarly body- and subject-making apparatuses. Digital and molecular
species vied for attention with urethras and vaginas. Females in trouble
seemed to luxuriate everywhere; even the industrially synthesized molecules seemed to respond to the lure of (always nonreproductive, in this
story) sexual tropisms, despite decades of astute feminist wariness of
so-called sex hormones. Cyborgs laughed. Do cyborgs get mitral valve
disease or go through menopause? Of course they do, just like their kin.
The relations of intimate care yoking together one woman and one dog
rampaged virally into all sorts of publics. Sheer contagion. Companion
species infect each other all the time. Bodily ethical and political obligations are infectious, or they should be. Before my dog and I could get out
of the story, we were in the nonoptional company of—and accountable
to—heifers in labs, beef cattle in feedlots, pregnant women in all sorts
of places, daughters and sons and granddaughters and grandsons of
once pregnant women, angry and well-informed women’s health movement activists, dogs with heart disease, and bevies of other spayed leaky
bitches and their people in vet clinics and on beds.
In my Premarin story, all the players seemed to be marinating in vats
of Canadian equine urine, the only thing that seemed to hold together
the virally exploding, vulnerable species of the tale. One registered
trademark’s travels through bodies brought together, in the need to craft
response-ability, quite a motley of mortal beings: fetal calves stripped
of amniotic fluid, urinating pregnant Canadian women, pregnant mares
and their foals and consorts in Manitoba and beyond, activists in horse
rescue and women’s health, economically strapped contract farmers, a
California menopausal woman worried about familial heart disease in
the company of a lucrative market-ready crowd of other menopausal
Americans, and German zebras in zoos in the 1930s. Big Pharma, Big
Agribusiness, and Big Science provided drama and villains aplenty, but
also plenty of reason to damp down the certainty of villainy and explore
the complexities of cyborg worlding.
Each diner exposed to high risks of familial heart failure, eating dangerous and notorious estrogens in later life seems, finally, to be what
here, in this tale, conjugates—yokes together—the cyborg author and
the dog of her heart. Cum panis, companion species, females of two species (along with their microbiomes with species in the zillions) at table
together, in different decades, slurping drafts of dubious estrogens in
self-care and care of the other. Why tell stories like this, when there are
only more and more openings and no bottom lines? Because there are
quite definite response-abilities that are strengthened in such stories.
It is no longer news that corporations, farms, clinics, labs, homes,
sciences, technologies, and multispecies lives are entangled in multiscalar, multitemporal, multimaterial worlding; but the details matter.
The details link actual beings to actual response-abilities. Each time a
Awash in Urine

story helps me remember what I thought I knew, or introduces me to
new knowledge, a muscle critical for caring about flourishing gets some
aerobic exercise. Such exercise enhances collective thinking and movement too. Each time I trace a tangle and add a few threads that first
seemed whimsical but turned out to be essential to the fabric, I get a
bit straighter that staying with the trouble of complex worlding is the
name of the game of living and dying well together on terra. Having
eaten Premarin makes me more accountable to the well-being of ranchers, northern prairie ecologies, horses, activists, scientists, and women
with breast cancer than I would otherwise be. Giving my dog des makes
me accountable to histories and ongoing possibilities differently than
if we never shaped kinships with the attachment sites of this molecule.
Perhaps reading this 
consequences for response-ability too.
We are all responsible to and for shaping conditions for multispecies
flourishing in the face of terrible histories, but not in the same ways. The
differences matter—in ecologies, economies, species, lives.

“Do you realize,” the phytolinguist will say to the aesthetic critic, “that they
couldn’t even read Eggplant?” And they will smile at our ignorance, as they
pick up their rucksacks and hike on up to read the newly deciphered lyrics of
the lichen on the north face of Pike’s Peak.
—Ursula K. Le Guin, “The Author of the Acacia Seeds”

The political slogan I wore in the Reagan Star Wars era of the 1980s
read, “Cyborgs for Earthly Survival!” The terrifying times of George
H. W. Bush and the secondary Bushes made me switch to slogans purloined from tough schutzhund dog trainers, “Run Fast, Bite Hard!” and
“Shut Up and Train!” Today my slogan reads, “Stay with the Trouble!”
But in all these knots and especially now, wherewhenever that potent
and capacious placetime is—we need a hardy, soiled kind of wisdom.
Instructed by companion species of the myriad terran kingdoms in all
their placetimes, we need to reseed our souls and our home worlds in order to flourish—again, or maybe just for the first time—on a vulnerable
planet that is not yet murdered.1 We need not just reseeding, but also reinoculating with all the fermenting, fomenting, and nutrient-fixing associates that seeds need to thrive. Recuperation is still possible, but only

in multispecies alliance, across the killing divisions of nature, culture,
and technology and of organism, language, and machine.2 The feminist
cyborg taught me that; the humanimal worlds of dogs, chickens, turtles,
and wolves taught me that; and in fugal, fungal, microbial, symbiogenetic counterpoint, the acacia trees of Africa, the Americas, Australia,
and the Pacific Islands, with their congeries of associates reaching across
taxa, teach me that. Sowing worlds is about opening up the story of
companion species to more of its relentless diversity and urgent trouble.
To study the kind of situated, mortal, germinal wisdom we need, I
turn to Ursula K. Le Guin and Octavia Butler.3 It matters what stories we
tell to tell other stories with; it matters what concepts we think to think
other concepts with. It matters wherehow Ouroboros swallows its tale,
again. That’s how worlding gets on with itself in dragon time. These are
such simple and difficult koans; let us see what kind of get they spawn.
A careful student of dragons, Le Guin taught me the carrier bag theory
of fiction and of naturalcultural history.4 Her theories, her stories, are
capacious bags for collecting, carrying, and telling the stuff of living. “A
leaf a gourd a shell a net a bag a sling a sack a bottle a pot a box a container. A holder. A recipient.”5
So much of earth history has been told in the thrall of the fantasy of
the first beautiful words and weapons, of the first beautiful weapons as
words and vice versa. Tool, weapon, word: that is the word made flesh in
the image of the sky god. In a tragic story with only one real actor, one
real world-maker, the hero, this is the Man-making tale of the hunter
on a quest to kill and bring back the terrible bounty. This is the cutting,
sharp, combative tale of action that defers the suffering of glutinous,
earth-rotted passivity beyond bearing. All others in the prick tale are
props, ground, plot space, or prey. They don’t matter; their job is to be in
the way, to be overcome, to be the road, the conduit, but not the traveler,
not the begetter. The last thing the hero wants to know is that his beautiful words and weapons will be worthless without a bag, a container, a net.
Nonetheless, no adventurer should leave home without a sack. How
did a sling, a pot, a bottle suddenly get in the story? How do such lowly
things keep the story going? Or maybe even worse for the hero, how
do those concave, hollowed-out things, those holes in Being, from the
get-go generate richer, quirkier, fuller, unfitting, ongoing stories, stories
with room for the hunter but which weren’t and aren’t about him, the
self-making Human, the human-making machine of history? The slight
curve of the shell that holds just a little water, just a few seeds to give


away and to receive, suggests stories of becoming-with, of reciprocal induction, of companion species whose job in living and dying is not to end
the storying, the worlding. With a shell and a net, becoming human, becoming humus, becoming terran, has another shape—the side-winding,
snaky shape of becoming-with.
Le Guin quickly assures all of us who are wary of evasive, sentimental
holisms and organicisms: “Not, let it be said at once, [am I] an unaggressive or uncombative human being. I am an aging, angry woman laying
about me with my handbag, fighting hoodlums off . . . It’s just one of
those damned things you have to do in order to go on gathering wild oats
and telling stories.”6 There is room for conflict in Le Guin’s story, but her
carrier bag narratives are full of much else in wonderful, messy tales to
use for retelling, or reseeding, possibilities for getting on now, as well as
in deep earth history. “It sometimes seems that that [heroic] story is approaching its end. Lest there be no more telling of stories at all, some of us
out here in the wild oats, amid the alien corn, think we’d better start telling another one, which maybe people can go on with when the old one’s
finished . . . Hence it is with a certain feeling of urgency that I seek the
nature, subject, words of the other story, the untold one, the life story.”7
Octavia Butler knows all about the untold stories, the ones that need
a restitched seedbag and a traveling sower to hollow out a place to flourish after the catastrophes of that Sharp Story. In Parable of the Sower,
the U.S. teenage hyperempath Lauren Oya Olamina grows up in a gated
community in Los Angeles. Important in New World Santeria and in
Catholic cults of the Virgin Mary, in Yoruba Oya, mother of nine, is the
Orisha of the Niger River, with its nine tributaries, its nine tentacles
gripping the living and the dead. She is among the chthonic entities of a
thousand names, generators of persisting times called the Chthulucene.
Wind, creation, and death are Oya’s attributes and powers for worlding.
Olamina’s gift and curse were her inescapable abilities to feel the pain of
all living beings, a result of a drug taken by her addicted mother during
pregnancy. After the murder of her family, the young woman traveled
from a devastated and dying society with a motley band of survivors to
sow a new community rooted in a religion called Earthseed. In the story
arc of what was to be a trilogy (Parable of the Trickster was not completed
before her death), Butler’s sf worlding imagined Earthseed ultimately
flourishing on a new home world among the stars. But Olamina started
the first Earthseed community in Northern California, and it is there
and at other sites on Terra where my own explorations for reseeding our
Sowing Worlds

home world must stay. This home is where Butler’s lessons apply with
special ferocity.
In the Parable novels, “God is change,” and Earthseed teaches that the
seeds of life on earth can be transplanted and can adapt and flourish in all
sorts of unexpected and always dangerous places and times. Note “can,”
not necessarily “may” or “should.” Butler’s entire work as an sf writer
is riveted on the problem of destruction and wounded flourishing—
not simply survival—in exile, diaspora, abduction, and transportation—
the earthly gift-burden of the descendants of slaves, refugees, immigrants, travelers, and of the indigenous too. It is not a burden that stops
with settlement. In the sf mode,8 my own writing works and plays only
on earth, in the mud of cyborgs, dogs, acacia trees, ants, microbes, fungi,
and all their kin and get. With the twist in the belly that etymology
brings, I remember too that kin, with the g-k exchange of Indo-European
cousins, becomes gen on the way to get. Terran spawn all, we are sidewinding as well as arboreal kindred—blown get—in infected and seedy
generation after generation, blowsy kind after blowsy kind.
Planting seeds requires medium, soil, matter, mutter, mother. These
words interest me greatly for and in the sf terraforming mode of attention. In the feminist sf mode, matter is never “mere” medium to the
“informing” seed; rather, mixed in terra’s carrier bag, kin and get have a
much richer congress for worlding. Matter is a powerful, mindfully bodied word, the matrix and generatrix of things, kin to the riverine generatrix Oya. It doesn’t take much digging or swimming to get to matter as
source, ground, flux, reason, and consequential stuff—the matter of the
thing, the generatrix that is simultaneously fluid and solid, mathematical and fleshly—and by that etymological route to one tone of matter as
timber, as hard inner wood (in Portuguese, madeira). Matter as timber
brings me to Le Guin’s The Word for World Is Forest, published inas part of her Hainish fabulations for dispersed native and colonial beings locked in struggle over imperialist exploitation and the chances for
multispecies flourishing. That story took place on another planet and
is very like the tale of colonial oppression in the name of pacification
and resource extraction that takes place on Pandora in James Cameron’s 2009 blockbuster film Avatar. Except one particular detail is very
different; Le Guin’s Forest does not feature a repentant and redeemed
“white” colonial hero. Her story has the shape of a carrier bag that is
disdained by heroes. Also, even as they condemn their chief oppressor
to live, rather than killing him after their victory, for Le Guin’s “natives”

An ant of the species Rhytidoponera metallica in western
Australia holding a seed of Acacia neurophylla by the elaiosome
during seed transport. © Benoit Guenard, 2007.

the consequences of the freedom struggle bring the lasting knowledge
of how to murder each other, not just the invader, as well as how to recollect and perhaps relearn to flourish in the face of this history. There is
no status quo ante, no salvation tale, like that on Pandora. Instructed
by the struggle on Forest’s planet of Athshea, I will stay on Terra and
imagine that Le Guin’s Hainish species have not all been of the hominid lineage or web, no matter how dispersed. Matter, mater, mutter
make me—make us, that collective gathered in the narrative bag of the
Chthulucene—stay with the naturalcultural multispecies trouble on
earth, strengthened by the freedom struggle for a postcolonial world on
Le Guin’s planet of Athshea. It is time to return to the question of finding seeds for terraforming for a recuperating earthly world of difference,
wherewhen the knowledge of how to murder is not scarce.
My carrier bag for terraforming is full of acacia seeds, but as we shall
see, that collection brings its full share of trouble too. I begin with the
decapitated corpse of an ant found by scientist-explorers next to Seedin a row of degerminated acacia seeds at the end of an ant-colony tunnel
in Le Guin’s story “‘The Author of the Acacia Seeds’ and Other Extracts
from the Journal of the Association of Therolinguistics.” The therolinguists
were perplexed in their reading of the touch-gland exudate script that
the ant seemed to have written in her biochemical ink on the aligned
seeds. The scientists were uncertain both about how to interpret the
script and about who the ant was—an intruder killed by the colony’s
soldiers? A resident rebel writing seditious messages about the queen
Sowing Worlds

and her eggs? A myrmexian tragic poet?9 The therolinguists could not
apply rules from human languages to their task, and their grasp of animal communication was (is) still raggedly fragmentary, full of guesses
across profound naturalcultural difference. From the scientific and hermeneutic study of other animal languages recorded in difficult expeditions of discovery, therolinguists held that “language is communication”
and that many animals use an active collective kinesthetic semiotics,
as well as chemosensory, visual, and tactile language. They might have
been troubled about their reading of this unexpected ant’s exudate text,
but they felt confident that at least they were engaging therolingistic
acts and would someday learn to read them.
Plants, however, they speculated, “do not communicate” and so have
no language. Something else is going on in the vegetative world, perhaps
something that should be called art.10 Phytolinguistics pursued along
these lines by the scientists and explorers was just beginning and would
surely require entirely new modes of attention, field methodology, and
conceptual invention. The president of the Therolinguists Association
waxed lyrical: “If a noncommunicative, vegetative art exists, we must
re-think the very elements of our science, and learn a whole new set of
techniques. For it is simply not possible to bring the critical and technical skills appropriate to the study of weasel murder-mysteries, or Battrachian erotica, or the tunnel-sagas of the earthworm, to bear on the art
of the redwood or the zucchini.”11
In my view, the president got it right about the need to question the
tissues of one’s knowings and ways of knowing in order to respond to
nonanthropocentric difference. But a closer look at that decapitated ant
and the degerminated acacia seeds should have told those still zoocentric
scientists that their sublime aestheticization of plants led them astray
about earth-making companion species. Plants are consummate communicators in a vast terran array of modalities, making and exchanging
meanings among and between an astonishing galaxy of associates across
the taxa of living beings. Plants, along with bacteria and fungi, are also
animals’ lifelines to communication with the abiotic world, from sun to
gas to rock. To pursue this matter, I need to leave Le Guin’s story for now
and instead draw on the stories told by students of symbiosis, symbiogenesis, and ecological evolutionary developmental biology.12
Acacias and ants can do almost all of the work for me. With fifteen
hundred species (about a thousand of which are indigenous to Australia), the genus Acacia is one of the largest genera of trees and shrubs on
earth. Different acacias flourish in temperate, tropical, and desert climates across oceans and continents. They are crucial species maintaining
the healthy biodiversity of complex ecologies, housing many lodgers, and
nourishing a motley guest list of diners. Relocated from wherever they
originated, acacias were the darlings of human colonial foresters and still
are the stock-in-trade of landscapers and plant breeders. In those histories, some acacias become the overgrowing destroyers of endemic ecologies that are the special responsibility of restoration biologists and just
plain citizens of recuperating places.13 In part and in whole, acacias show
up in the most unexpected places. They give the bounty of the gorgeous
hardwoods like Hawaiian koa, which are cut down in greedy, exterminating, global-capitalist excess. Acacias also make the humble polysaccharide
gums, including gum arabic from Acacia senegal, which show up in human industrial products like ice cream, hand lotion, beer, ink, jelly beans,
and old-fashioned postage stamps. Those same gum exudates are the
immune system of the acacias themselves, helping to seal wounds and
discourage opportunistic fungi and bacteria. Bees make a prized honey
from acacia flowers, among the few honeys that will not crystallize. Many
animals, including moths, human beings, and the only known vegetarian
spider, use acacias for food. People rely on acacias for seed pastes, fritters
made from pods, curries, shoots, toasted seeds, and root beer.
Acacias are members of the vast family of legumes. That means that,
among their many talents, in association with fungal mycorrhizal symbionts (which host their own bacterial endosymbionts), many acacias fix
the nitrogen crucial to soil fertility, plant growth, and animal existence.14
In defending themselves from grazers and pests, acacias are veritable alkaloid chemical factories, making many compounds that are psychoactive
in animals like me. I can only imagine with my hominid brain what these
compounds feel like to critters like insects. From giraffes’ points of view,
acacias sport lovely leafy salads on their crowns, and the acacias respond
to assiduous giraffe pruning by producing the picturesque African savannah flattop tree landscape prized by human photographers and tourist
enterprises, not to mention life-saving shade and rest for many critters.
Supported within this big narrative netbag, I am ready to add a few
details of my own to Le Guin’s ongoing carrier bag story of the decapitated ant and her acacia-seed writing tablet. The therolinguists were
worried about the message they tried to decipher in the writing, but I am
riveted by what drew ant and acacia seed together in the first place. How
did they know each other? How did they communicate? Why did the ant
Sowing Worlds

paint her message on that shiny surface? The degerminated seed is the
clue. Acacia verticulata, an Australian shrub related to the coastal wattle
so worrisome to Southern Californian ecologists, makes seeds that are
dispersed by ants. The wily acacias draw the ants’ attention with a showy
attachment stalk coiled around every seed. The ants carry the decorated
seeds to their nests, where they consume the fat-rich attachment stalks,
called elaisosomes, at their leisure. In time, the seeds germinate out of
the nice womb provided by the ant tunnels, and the ants have the nutritious, calorie-dense food they need to fuel all those stories of their
hard-working habits. In evolutionary-ecological terms, these ants and
acacias are necessary to each other’s reproductive business.
Some ant-acacia associations are much more elaborate than that,
reaching into the internal tissues of each participant, shaping genomes
and developmental patterning of the structures and functions of both
companion species. Several Central American acacias make large, hollow thornlike structures called stipules that provide shelter for several
species of Pseudomyrmex ants. “The ants feed on a secretion of sap on
the leaf-stalk and small, lipid-rich [and protein-rich] food-bodies at the
tips of the leaflets called Beltian bodies. In return, the ants add protection to the plant against herbivores.”15 There is nothing like a dedicated
bevy of angry, biting ants to make a day’s foraging uncomfortable and
the leaf-grazer of whatever species move on to less infested pantries. In
the 2005 bbc Science and Nature five-part special with David Attenborough, in the episode called “Intimate Relations,” we see these matters
in exquisite, sensuous detail. We also witness that “some ants ‘farm’ the
trees that give them shelter, creating areas known as ‘Devil’s gardens.’ To
make sure these grow without competition, they kill off other seedlings
in the surrounding vegetation.”16 The ants accomplish this task by gnawing methodically through branches and shoots and then injecting formic
acid into the conductive tissue of the offending plants. Similar ant-acacia
mutualisms occur in Africa. For example, the Whistling Thorn acacias
in Kenya provide shelter for ants in the thorns and nectar in extrafloral
nectaries for their symbiotic ants, such as Crematogaster mimosae. In
turn, the ants protect the plant by attacking large mammalian herbivores and stem-boring beetles that damage the plant. The more one
looks, the more the name of the game of living and dying on earth is a
convoluted multispecies affair that goes by the name of symbiosis, the
yoking together of companion species, at table together.
Ants and acacias are both highly diverse, well-populated groups. They
are sometimes world travelers and sometimes homebodies that cannot
flourish away from natal countries and natal neighbors. Homebody or
traveler, their ways of living and dying have consequences for terrraforming, past and present. Ants and acacias are avid for association with
critters of all sorts of sizes and scales, and they are opportunistic in their
approaches to living and dying in both evolutionary and organismic or
whole group timeplaces. These species in all their complexities and ongoingness both do great harm and sustain whole worlds, sometimes in
association with human people, sometimes not. The devil is truly in the
details of response-able naturecultures inhabited by accountable companion species. They—we—are here to live and die with, not just think and
write with. But also that, also here to sow worlds with, to write in ant
exudates on acacia seeds to keep the stories going. No more than Le Guin’s
carrier bag story—with the crusty elderly lady ready to use her purse to
whack evildoers and the author avid for the mess as well as the order of
her bumptious critters, human and not—is my story of these worldly wise
symbionts a tale of rectitude and final peace. With Le Guin, I am committed to the finicky, disruptive details of good stories that don’t know how to
finish. Good stories reach into rich pasts to sustain thick presents to keep
the story going for those who come after.17 Emma Goldman’s understanding of anarchist love and rage make sense in the worlds of ants and acacias.
These companion species are a prompt to shaggy dog stories—growls,
bites, whelps, games, snufflings, and all. Symbiogenesis is not a synonym
for the good, but for becoming-with each other in response-ability.
Finally, and not a moment too soon, sympoesis enlarges and displaces
autopoesis and all other self-forming and self-sustaining system fantasies. Sympoesis is a carrier bag for ongoingness, a yoke for becomingwith, for staying with the trouble of inheriting the damages and achievements of colonial and postcolonial naturalcultural histories in telling the
tale of still possible recuperation. Le Guin’s therolinguists, even bound in
their animal hides, had the vision of these scary and inspiring possibilities: “And with them, or after them, may there not come that even bolder
adventurer—the first geolinguist, who, ignoring the delicate, transient
lyrics of the lichen, will read beneath it the still less communicative, still
more passive, wholly atemporal, cold, volcanic, poetry of the rocks; each
one a word spoken, how long ago, by the earth itself, in the immense solitude, the immenser community, of space.”18 Communicative and mute,
the old lady and her purse will be found in Earthseed communities on
terra and throughout timespace. Mutter, matter, mother.
Sowing Worlds


research is research conducted
under conditions that make beings interesting.
—Vinciane Despret
To think with an enlarged mentality means that one trains
one’s imagination to go visiting.
—Hannah Arendt, Lectures on Kant’s Political Philosophy

Vinciane Despret thinks-with other beings, human and not. That is a rare
and precious vocation. Vocation: calling, calling with, called by, calling as
if the world mattered, calling out, going too far, going visiting. Despret
listened to a singing blackbird one morning—a living blackbird outside
her particular window—and that way learned what importance sounds
like. She thinks in attunement with those she thinks with—recursively,
inventively, relentlessly—with joy and verve. She studies how beings
render each other capable in actual encounters, and she theorizes—
makes cogently available—that kind of theory and method. Despret is
not interested in thinking by discovering the stupidities of others, or
by reducing the field of attention to prove a point. Her kind of thinking
enlarges, even invents, the competencies of all the players, including
herself, such that the domain of ways of being and knowing dilates, ex-

pands, adds both ontological and epistemological possibilities, proposes
and enacts what was not there before. That is her worlding practice.
She is a philosopher and a scientist who is allergic to denunciation and
hungry for discovery, needy for what must be known and built together,
with and for earthly beings, living, dead, and yet to come.
Referring both to her own practice for observing scientists and also to
the practices of ethologist Thelma Rowell observing her Soay sheep, Despret affirmed “a particular epistemological position to which I am committed, one that I call a virtue: the virtue of politeness.”1 In every sense,
Despret’s cultivation of politeness is a curious practice. She trains her
whole being, not just her imagination, in Arendt’s words, “to go visiting.”
Visiting is not an easy practice; it demands the ability to find others actively interesting, even or especially others most people already claim to
know all too completely, to ask questions that one’s interlocutors truly
find interesting, to cultivate the wild virtue of curiosity, to retune one’s
ability to sense and respond—and to do all this politely! What is this
sort of politeness? It sounds more than a little risky. Curiosity always
leads its practitioners a bit too far off the path, and that way lie stories.
The first and most important thing at risk in Despret’s practice is an
approach that assumes that beings have pre-established natures and abilities that are simply put into play in an encounter. Rather, Despret’s sort
of politeness does the energetic work of holding open the possibility that
surprises are in store, that something interesting is about to happen, but
only if one cultivates the virtue of letting those one visits intra-actively
shape what occurs. They are not who/what we expected to visit, and
we are not who/what were anticipated either. Visiting is a subject- and
object-making dance, and the choreographer is a trickster. Asking questions comes to mean both asking what another finds intriguing and also
how learning to engage that changes everybody in unforeseeable ways.
Good questions come only to a polite inquirer, especially a polite inquirer
provoked by a singing blackbird. With good questions, even or especially
mistakes and misunderstandings can become interesting. This is not so
much a question of manners, but of epistemology and ontology, and of
method alert to off-the-beaten-path practices. At the least, this sort of
politeness is not what Miss Manners purveys in her advice column.
There are so many examples of Despret learning and teaching polite
inquiry. Perhaps the most famous is her visit to the Negev desert field
site of the Israeli ornithologist Amotz Zahavi, where she encountered
Arabian babblers who defied orthodox accounts of what birds should
be doing, even as the scientists also acted off-script scientifically. Specifically, Zahavi asked in excruciating detail, what matters to babblers? He
could not do good science otherwise. The babblers’ practices of altruism were off the charts, and they seemed to do it, according to Zahavi,
for reasons of competitive prestige not well accounted for by theories
like kin selection. Zahavi let the babblers be interesting; he asked them
interesting questions; he saw them dance. “Not only were these birds
described as dancing together in the morning sunrise, not only were they
eager to offer presents to one another, not only would they take pride in
caring for each other’s nestlings or in defending an endangered comrade,
but also, according to Zahavi’s depiction, their relations relied on trust.”2
What Despret tells us she came to know is that the specific practices
of observation, narration, and the liveliness of the birds were far from
independent of each other. This was not just a question of worldviews
and related theories shaping research design and interpretations, or
of any other purely discursive effect. What scientists actually do in the
field affects the ways “animals see their scientists seeing them” and
therefore how the animals respond.3 In a strong sense, observers and
birds rendered each other capable in ways not written into preexisting
scripts, but invented or provoked, more than simply shown, in practical research. Birds and scientists were in dynamic, moving relations of
attunement. The behavior of birds and their observers were made, but
not made up. Stories are essential, but are never “mere” stories. Zahavi
seemed intent on making experiments with rather than on babblers. He
was trying to look at the world with the babblers rather than at them, a
very demanding practice. And the same demands were made of Despret,
who came to watch scientists but ended up in a much more complex
tangle of practices. Birds and scientists do something, and they do it
together. They become-with each other.
The world in the southern Israeli desert was composed by adding
competencies to engage competencies, adding perspectives to engage
perspectives, adding subjectivities to engage subjectivities, adding versions to understand versions. In short, this science worked by addition,
not subtraction. Worlds enlarged; the babblers and the scientists—
Despret included—inhabited a world of propositions not available before. “Both humans and babblers create narratives, rather than just
telling them. They create/disclose new scripts.”4 Good questions were
posed; surprising answers made the world richer. Visiting might be
risky, but it is definitely not boring.
Despret’s work is full of literal collaborations, with people and with
animals, not simply metaphors of thinking with each other. I admit I am
drawn most by the collaborations that entangle people, critters, and
apparatuses. No wonder that Despret’s work with sociologist Jocelyne
Porcher and the farmers, pigs, and cows in their care sustains me. Despret and Porcher visited cow and pig breeders on nonindustrial French
farms, where the humans and animals lived in daily interaction that
led sober, nonromantic, working breeders to say such things as, “We
don’t stop talking with our animals.”5 The question that led Despret and
Porcher to the farmers circled around their efforts to think through what
it means to claim that these domestic food-producing animals are working, and working with their people. The first difficulty, not surprisingly,
was to figure out how to ask questions that interested the breeders, that
engaged them in their conversations and labors with their animals. It
was decidedly not interesting to the breeders to ask how animals and
people are the same or different in general. These are people who make
particular animals live and die and who live, and die, by them. The task
was to engage these breeders in constructing the questions that mattered to them. The breeders incessantly “uprooted” the researchers’ questions to address the queries that concerned them in their work.
The story has many turns, but what interested me most was the insistence of the breeders that their animals “know what we want, but we,
we don’t know what they want.”6 Figuring out what their animals want,
so that people and cows could together accomplish successful breeding,
was the fundamental conjoined work of the farm. Farmers bad at listening to their animals, bad at talking to them, and bad at responding
were not good farmers in their peers’ estimation. The animals paid attention to their farmers; paying equally effective attention to the cows
and pigs was the job of good breeders. This is an extension of subjectivities for both people and critters, “becoming what the other suggests to
you, accepting a proposal of subjectivity, acting in the manner in which
the other addresses you, actualizing and verifying this proposal, in the
sense of rendering it true.”7 The result is bringing into being animals
that nourish humans, and humans that nourish animals. Living and dying are both in play. “Working together” in this kind of daily interaction
of labor, conversation, and attention seems to me to be the right idiom.
Continually hungry for more of Despret’s visiting with critters, their
people, and their apparatuses—hungry for more of her elucidations
of “anthropo-zoo-genesis”8 —I have a hard time feeling satisfied with
only human people on the menu. That prejudice took a tumble when I
read Women Who Make a Fuss: The Unfaithful Daughters of Virginia Woolf,
which Isabelle Stengers and Vinciane Despret wrote together with an
extraordinary collective of bumptious women.9 “Think we must!” cries
this book, in concert with the famous line from Virginia Woolf’s Three
Guineas. In Western worlds, and elsewhere too, women have hardly
been included in the patrilines of thinking, most certainly including the
patrilines making decisions for (yet another) war. Why should Virginia
Woolf, or any other woman, or men for that matter, be faithful to such
patrilines and their demands for sacrifice? Infidelity seems the least we
should demand of ourselves!
This all matters, but the question in this book is not precisely that,
but rather what thinking can possibly mean in the civilization in which
we find ourselves. “But how do we take back up a collective adventure
that is multiple and ceaselessly reinvented, not on an individual basis,
but in a way that passes the baton, that is to say, affirms new givens and
new unknowns?”10 We must somehow make the relay, inherit the trouble, and reinvent the conditions for multispecies flourishing, not just in
a time of ceaseless human wars and genocides, but in a time of humanpropelled mass extinctions and multispecies genocides that sweep people and critters into the vortex. We must “dare ‘to make’ the relay; that
is to create, to fabulate, in order not to despair. In order to induce a
transformation, perhaps, but without the artificial loyalty that would
resemble ‘in the name of a cause,’ no matter how noble it might be.”11
Hannah Arendt and Virginia Woolf both understood the high stakes
of training the mind and imagination to go visiting, to venture off the
beaten path to meet unexpected, non-natal kin, and to strike up conversations, to pose and respond to interesting questions, to propose together something unanticipated, to take up the unasked-for obligations
of having met. This is what I have called cultivating response-ability.
Visiting is not a heroic practice; making a fuss is not the Revolution;
thinking with each other is not Thought. Opening up versions so stories
can be ongoing is so mundane, so earth-bound. That is precisely the
point. The blackbird sings its importance; the babblers dance their shining prestige; the storytellers crack the established disorder. That is what
“going too far” means, and this curious practice is not safe. Like Arendt
and Woolf, Despret and her collaborators understand that we are dealing
with “the idea of a world that could be habitable.”12 “The very strength
of women who make a fuss is not to represent the True, rather to be
witnesses for the possibility of other ways of doing what would perhaps
be ‘better.’ The fuss is not the heroic statement of a grand cause . . . It
instead affirms the need to resist the stifling impotence created by the
‘no possibility to do otherwise, whether we want it or not,’ which now
reigns everywhere.”13 It is past time to make such a fuss.
Despret’s curious practice has no truck with loyalty to a cause or doctrine; but it draws deeply from another virtue that is sometimes confused with loyalty, namely, “thinking from” a heritage. She is tuned to
the obligations that inhere in starting from situated histories, situated
stories. She retells the parable of the twelve camels in order to tease out
what it means to “start from,” that is, to “remain obligated with respect
to that from which we speak, think, or act. It means to let ourselves learn
from the event and to create from it.” In a sort of cat’s cradle with powerful fables, Despret received the parable from Isabelle Stengers, and then
she relayed it to me in early 2013. I relay it back to her here. To inherit is
an act “which demands thought and commitment. An act that calls for
our transformation by the very deed of inheriting.”14
In his will, the father in this story left his three quarrelsome sons
a seemingly impossible inheritance: eleven camels to be divided in a
precise way, half to the eldest son, a quarter to the second son, and a
sixth to the third. The perverse requirements of the legacy provoked
the confused sons, who were on the verge of failing to fulfill the terms
of the will, to visit an old man living in the village. His savvy kindness in
giving the sons a twelfth camel allowed the heirs to create a solution to
their difficult heritage; they could make their inheritance active, alive,
generative. With twelve camels, the fractions worked, and there was one
camel left over to give back to the old man.
Despret notes that the tale she read left actual camels out of the enlargement and creativity of finding what it means to “start from.” Those
storied camels were conventional, discursive, figural beasts, whose only
function was to give occasion for the problematic sons to grow in patriarchal understanding, recapitulating more than a little the history
of philosophy that Despret—and I—inherited. But by listening, telling, and activating that particular story her way, she makes something
that was absent present. She made an interesting, curious fuss without
denouncing anybody. Therefore, another heritage emerges and makes
claims on anyone listening, anyone attuned. It isn’t just philosophy that
has to change; the mortal world shifts. Long-legged, big-lipped, humped
camels shake the dust from their hot, hard-worked hides and nuzzle the
storyteller for a scratch behind the ears. Despret, and because of her, we,
inherit camels now, camels with their people, in their markets and places
of travel and labor, in their living and dying in worlds-at-stake, like the
contemporary Gobi Desert.15 We start from what is henceforth a dilated
story that makes unexpected demands to cultivate response-ability. If
we are to remain faithful to starting from the transformed story, we
can no longer not know or not care that camels and people are at stake
to each other—across regions, genders, races, species, practices. From
now on, call that philosophy, a game of cat’s cradle, not a lineage. We
are obligated to speak from situated worlds, but we no longer need start
from a humanist patriline and its breath-taking erasures and high-wire
acts. The risk of listening to a story is that it can obligate us in ramifying
webs that cannot be known in advance of venturing among their myriad
threads. In a world of anthropozoogenesis, the figural is more likely than
not to grow teeth and bite us in the bum.
Despret’s philosophical ethology starts from the dead and missing as
well as from the living and visible. She has studied situated human beings’
mourning practices for their dead in ways strongly akin to her practice of
philosophical ethology; in both domains, she attends to how—in practice—people can and do solicit the absent into vivid copresence, in many
kinds of temporality and materiality. She attends to how practices—
activated storytelling—can be on the side of what I call “ongoingness”:
that is, nurturing, or inventing, or discovering, or somehow cobbling
together ways for living and dying well with each other in the tissues of
an earth whose very habitability is threatened.16 Many kinds of failure of
ongoingness crumble lifeways in our times of onrushing extinctions, exterminations, wars, extractions, and genocides. Many kinds of absence,
or threatened absence, must be brought into ongoing response-ability,
not in the abstract but in homely storied cultivated practice.
To my initial surprise, this matter brought Despret and me together
with racing pigeons, also called carrier pigeons (in French voyageurs) and
with their avid fanciers (in French colombophiles, lovers of pigeons). I
wrote an essay for Despret after an extraordinary week with her and
her colleagues in the chateau at Cerisy in July 2010, in which I proposed
playing string figure games with companion species for cultivating multispecies response-ability.17 I sent Despret a draft containing my discussion of the wonderful art-technology-environmental-activist project by
Beatriz da Costa called PigeonBlog, as well as a discussion of the communities of racing pigeons and their fanciers in Southern California.
Pigeon racing is a working-class men’s sport around the world, one made
immensely difficult in conditions of urban war (Baghdad, Damascus),
racial and economic injustice (New York, Berlin), and displaced labor and
play of many kinds across regions (France, Iran, California).
I care about art-design-activist practices that join diverse people and
varied critters in shared, often vexed public spaces. “Starting from” this
caring, not from some delusional caring in general, landed me in innovative pigeon lofts, where, it turned out, Despret, attuned to practices
of commemoration, had already begun to roost. In particular, by leading
me to Matali Crasset’s Capsule, built in 2003 in the leisure park of Caudry, she shared her understanding of the power of holding open actual
space for ongoing living and working in the face of threatened absence as
a potent practice of commemoration.18 The Beauvois association of carrier pigeon fanciers asked Crasset, an artist and industrial designer, to
build a prototype pigeon loft that would combine beauty, functionality
for people and birds, and a pedagogic lure to draw future practitioners
into learning demanding skills. Actual pigeons had to thrive inhabiting
this loft; actual colombophiles had to experience the loft working; and
actual visitors to the ecological park, which was rehabilitating exhausted
farmland into a variegated nature reserve for recuperating critters and
people, had to be infected with the desire for a life transformed with
avian voyageurs. Despret understood that the prototype, the memorial,
had to be for both the carrier pigeons and their people—past, present
and yet to come.19
Neither the critters nor the people could have existed or could endure
without each other in ongoing, curious practices. Attached to ongoing
pasts, they bring each other forward in thick presents and still possible
futures; they stay with the trouble in speculative fabulation.
And then Camille came into our lives, rendering present the crossstitched generations of the not-yet-born and not-yet-hatched of vulnerable, coevolving species. Proposing a relay into uncertain futures, I
end Staying with the Trouble with a story, a speculative fabulation, which
starts from a writing workshop at Cerisy in summer 2013, part of Isabelle Stengers’s colloquium on gestes spéculatifs. Gestated in sf writing
practices, Camille is a keeper of memories in the flesh of worlds that may
become habitable again. Camille is one of the children of compost who
ripen in the earth to say no to the posthuman of every time.
I signed up for the afternoon workshop at Cerisy called Narration
Spéculative. The first day the organizers broke us down into writing
groups of two or three participants and gave us a task. We were asked
to fabulate a baby, and somehow to bring the infant through five human generations. In our times of surplus death of both individuals and
of kinds, a mere five human generations can seem impossibly long to
imagine flourishing with and for a renewed multispecies world. Over
the week, the groups wrote many kinds of possible futures in a rambunctious play of literary forms. Versions abounded. Besides myself,
the members of my group were the filmmaker Fabrizio Terranova and
psychologist, philosopher, and ethologist Vinciane Despret. The version


Mariposa mask, Guerrero, Mexico, 62 cm= 72.5 cm = 12.5 cm, before
, Samuel Frid Collection, UBC Museum of Anthropology, Vancouver.
Installation view, The Marvellous Real: Art from Mexico, 1926–2011 exhibition
(October 2013—March 2014), UBC Museum of Anthropology. Curator Nicola
Levell. Photograph by Jim Clifford.

I tell here is itself a speculative gesture, both a memory and a lure for a
“we” that came into being by fabulating a story together one summer
in Normandy. I cannot tell exactly the same story that my cowriters
would propose or remember. My story here is an ongoing speculative
fabulation, not a conference report for the archives. We started writing together, and we have since written Camille stories individually,
sometimes passing them back to the original writers for elaboration,
sometimes not; and we have encountered Camille and the Children of
Compost in other writing collaborations too.1 All the versions are necessary to Camille. My memoir for that workshop is an active casting of
threads from and for ongoing, shared stories. Camille, Donna, Vinciane,
and Fabrizio brought each other into copresence; we render each other
capable.
The Children of Compost insist that we need to write stories and live
lives for flourishing and for abundance, especially in the teeth of rampaging destruction and impoverization. Anna Tsing urges us to cobble
together the “arts of living on a damaged planet”; and among those arts
are cultivating the capacity to reimagine wealth, learn practical healing
rather than wholeness, and stitch together improbable collaborations
without worrying overmuch about conventional ontological kinds.2 The
Camille Stories are invitations to participate in a kind of genre fiction
committed to strengthening ways to propose near futures, possible futures, and implausible but real nows. Every Camille Story that I write
will make terrible political and ecological mistakes; and every story asks
readers to practice generous suspicion by joining in the fray of inventing
a bumptious crop of Children of Compost.3 Readers of science fiction are
accustomed to the lively and irreverent arts of fan fiction. Story arcs and
worlds are fodder for mutant transformations or for loving but perverse
extensions. The Children of Compost invite not so much fan fiction as
sym fiction, the genre of sympoiesis and symchthonia—the coming together of earthly ones. The Children of Compost want the Camille Stories to be a pilot project, a model, a work and play object, for composing
collective projects, not just in the imagination but also in actual story
writing. And on and under the ground.
Vinciane, Fabrizio, and I felt a vital pressure to provide our baby with
a name and a pathway into what was not yet but might be. We also felt
a vital pressure to ask our baby to be part of learning, over five generations, to radically reduce the pressure of human numbers on earth,
currently set on a course to climb to more than 11 billion by the end of


the twenty-first century ce. We could hardly approach the five generations through a story of heteronormative reproduction (to use the ugly
but apt American feminist idiom)! More than a year later, I realized that
Camille taught me how to say, “Make Kin Not Babies.”4
Immediately, however, as soon as we proposed the name of Camille to
each other, we realized that we were now holding a squirming child who
had no truck with conventional genders or with human exceptionalism.
This was a child born for sympoiesis—for becoming-with and makingwith a motley clutch of earth others.5
Imagining the World of the Camilles

Luckily, Camille came into being at a moment of an unexpected but powerful, interlaced, planetwide eruption of numerous communities of a
few hundred people each, who felt moved to migrate to ruined places
and work with human and nonhuman partners to heal these places,
building networks, pathways, nodes, and webs of and for a newly habitable world.6
Only a portion of the earthwide, astonishing, and infectious action
for well-being came from intentional, migratory communities like Camille’s. Drawing from long histories of creative resistance and generative living in even the worst circumstances, people everywhere found
themselves profoundly tired of waiting for external, never materializing
solutions to local and systemic problems. Both large and small individuals, organizations, and communities joined with each other, and with
migrant communities like Camille’s, to reshape terran life for an epoch
that could follow the deadly discontinuities of the Anthropocene, Capitalocene, and Plantationocene. In system-changing simultaneous waves
and pulses, diverse indigenous peoples and all sorts of other laboring
women, men, and children—who had been long subjected to devastating conditions of extraction and production in their lands, waters,
homes, and travels—innovated and strengthened coalitions to recraft
conditions of living and dying to enable flourishing in the present and
in times to come. These eruptions of healing energy and activism were
ignited by love of earth and its human and nonhuman beings and by
rage at the rate and scope of extinctions, exterminations, genocides,
and immiserations in enforced patterns of multispecies living and dying
that threatened ongoingness for everybody. Love and rage contained
the germs of partial healing even in the face of onrushing destruction.
the camille stories

None of the Communities of Compost could imagine that they inhabited or moved to “empty land.” Such still powerful, destructive fictions of
settler colonialism and religious revivalism, secular or not, were fiercely
resisted. The Communities of Compost worked and played hard to understand how to inherit the layers upon layers of living and dying that
infuse every place and every corridor. Unlike inhabitants in many other
utopian movements, stories, or literatures in the history of the earth, the
Children of Compost knew they could not deceive themselves that they
could start from scratch. Precisely the opposite insight moved them;
they asked and responded to the question of how to live in the ruins
that were still inhabited, with ghosts and with the living too. Coming
from every economic class, color, caste, religion, secularism, and region,
members of the emerging diverse settlements around the earth lived by
a few simple but transformative practices, which in turn lured—became
vitally infectious for—many other peoples and communities, both migratory and stable. The communities diverged in their development with
sympoietic creativity, but they remained tied together by sticky threads.
The linking practices grew from the sense that healing and ongoingness in ruined places requires making kin in innovative ways. In the
infectious new settlements, every new child must have at least three
parents, who may or may not practice new or old genders. Corporeal differences, along with their fraught histories, are cherished. New children
must be rare and precious, and they must have the robust company of
other young and old ones of many kinds. Kin relations can be formed
at any time in life, and so parents and other sorts of relatives can be
added or invented at significant points of transition. Such relationships
enact strong lifelong commitments and obligations of diverse kinds. Kin
making as a means of reducing human numbers and demands on the
earth, while simultaneously increasing human and other critters’ flourishing, engaged intense energies and passions in the dispersed emerging
worlds. But kin making and rebalancing human numbers had to happen
in risky embodied connections to places, corridors, histories, and ongoing decolonial and postcolonial struggles, and not in the abstract and
not by external fiat. Many failed models of population control provided
strong cautionary tales.
Thus the work of these communities was and is intentional kin
making across deep damage and significant difference. By the early
twenty-first century, historical social action and cultural and scientific
knowledges—much of it activated by anticolonial, antiracist, proqueer



Make Kin Not Babies. Sticker, 2 = 3 in., made by Kern Toy, Beth Stephens,
Annie Sprinkle, and Donna Haraway.

feminist movement—had seriously unraveled the once-imagined natural bonds of sex and gender and race and nation, but undoing the widespread destructive commitment to the still-conceived natural necessity
of the tie between kin making and a treelike biogenetic reproductive
genealogy became a key task for the Children of Compost.
The decision to bring a new human infant into being is strongly structured to be a collective one for the emerging communities. Further, no
one can be coerced to bear a child or punished for birthing one outside
community auspices.7 The Children of Compost nurture the born ones
every way they can, even as they work and play to mutate the apparatuses of kin making and to reduce radically the burdens of human numbers across the earth. Although discouraged in the form of individual
decisions to make a new baby, reproductive freedom of the person is
actively cherished.
This freedom’s most treasured power is the right and obligation of
the human person, of whatever gender, who is carrying a pregnancy to
choose an animal symbiont for the new child.8 All new human members
of the group who are born in the context of community decision making
come into being as symbionts with critters of actively threatened spethe camille stories

cies, and therefore with the whole patterned fabric of living and dying
of those particular beings and all their associates, for whom the possibility of a future is very fragile. Human babies born through individual
reproductive choice do not become biological symbionts, but they do
live in many other kinds of sympoiesis with human and nonhuman critters. Over the generations, the Communities of Compost experienced
complex difficulties with hierarchical caste formations and sometimes
violent clashes between children born as symbionts and those born as
more conventional human individuals. Syms and non-syms, sometimes
literally, did not see eye to eye easily.
The animal symbionts are generally members of migratory species,
which critically shapes the lines of visiting, working, and playing for all
the partners of the symbiosis. The members of the symbioses of the
Children of Compost, human and nonhuman, travel or depend on associates that travel; corridors are essential to their being. The restoration
and care of corridors, of connection, is a central task of the communities;
it is how they imagine and practice repair of ruined lands and waters and
their critters, human and not.9 The Children of Compost came to see
their shared kind as humus, rather than as human or nonhuman. The
core of each new child’s education is learning how to live in symbiosis so
as to nurture the animal symbiont, and all the other beings the symbiont
requires, into ongoingness for at least five human generations. Nurturing the animal symbiont also means being nurtured in turn, as well as
inventing practices of care of the ramifying symbiotic selves. The human
and animal symbionts keep the relays of mortal life going, both inheriting and inventing practices of recuperation, survival, and flourishing.
Because the animal partners in the symbiosis are migratory, each
human child learns and lives in nodes and pathways, with other people and their symbionts, in the alliances and collaborations needed to
make ongoingness possible. Literally and figurally, training the mind
to go visiting is a lifelong pedagogical practice in these communities.
Together and separately, the sciences and arts are passionately practiced
and enlarged as means to attune rapidly evolving ecological naturalcultural communities, including people, to live and die well throughout the
dangerous centuries of irreversible climate change and continuing high
rates of extinction and other troubles.
A treasured power of individual freedom for the new child is to choose
a gender—or not—when and if the patterns of living and dying evoke
that desire. Bodily modifications are normal among Camille’s people;


and at birth a few genes and a few microorganisms from the animal
symbiont are added to the symchild’s bodily heritage, so that sensitivity
and response to the world as experienced by the animal critter can be
more vivid and precise for the human member of the team. The animal
partners are not modified in these ways, although the ongoing relationships with lands, waters, people and peoples, critters, and apparatuses
render them newly capable in surprising ways too, including ongoing
EcoEvoDevo biological changes.10 Throughout life, the human person
may adopt further bodily modifications for pleasure and aesthetics or
for work, as long as the modifications tend to both symbionts’ wellbeing in the humus of sympoiesis.
Camille’s people moved to southern West Virginia in the Appalachian
Mountains on a site along the Kanawha River near Gauley Mountain,
which had been devastated by mountaintop removal coal mining. The
river and tributary creeks were toxic, the valleys filled with mine debris,
the people used and abandoned by the coal companies. Camille’s people
allied themselves with struggling multispecies communities in the rugged mountains and valleys, both the local people and the other critters.11
Most of the Communities of Compost that became most closely linked
to Camille’s gathering lived in places ravaged by fossil fuel extraction
or by mining of gold, uranium, or other metals. Places eviscerated by
deforestation or agriculture practiced as water and nutrient mining and
monocropping also figured large in Camille’s extended world.
Monarch butterflies frequent Camille’s West Virginia community
in the summers, and they undertake a many-thousand-mile migration
south to overwinter in a few specific forests of pine and oyamel fir in
central Mexico, along the border of the states of Michoacán and México.12 In the twentieth century, the monarch was declared the state insect
of West Virginia; and the Sanctuarío de la Biosfera Mariposa Monarca
(Monarch Butterfly Biosphere Reserve), a unesco World Heritage Site
after 2008, was established in the ecoregion along the Trans-Mexican
Volcanic Belt of surviving woodlands.
Throughout their complex migrations, the monarchs must eat, breed,
and rest in cities, ejidos, indigenous lands, farms, forests, and grasslands
of a vast and damaged landscape, populated by people and peoples living
and dying in many sorts of contested ecologies and economies. The larvae of the leap-frogging spring eastern monarch migrations from south
to north face the consequences of genetic and chemical technologies of
mass industrial agriculture that make their indispensable food—the
the camille stories

leaves of native, local milkweeds—unavailable along most of the routes.
Not just the presence of any milkweed, but the seasonal appearance of local milkweed varieties from Mexico to Canada, is syncopated in the flesh
of monarch caterpillars. Some milkweed species flourish in disturbed
land; they are good pioneer plants. The common milkweed of central
and eastern North America, Asclepias syriaca, is such an early successional
plant. Milkweeds thrive on roadsides and between crop furrows, and
these are the milkweeds that are especially susceptible to herbicides like
Monsanto’s glyphosphate-containing herbicide, Roundup. Another milkweed is also important to the eastern migration of monarchs, namely the
climax prairie species native to grasslands in later successional stages.
With the nearly complete destruction of climax prairies across North
America, this milkweed, Asclepias meadii, is fiercely endangered.13
Throughout the spring, summer, and fall, a large variety of early,
midseason, and late flowering plants, including milkweed blossoms,
produce the nectar sucked greedily by monarch adults. On the southern
journey to Mexico, the future of the North American eastern migration
is threatened by loss of the habitats of nectar-producing plants to feed
the nonbreeding adults flying to overwinter in their favorite roosting
trees in mountain woodlands. These woodlands in turn face naturalcultural degradation in complex histories of ongoing state, class, and
ethnic oppression of campesinos and indigenous peoples in the region,
for example, the Mazahuas and Otomi.14
Unhinged in space and time and stripped of food in both directions,
larvae starve and hungry adults grow sluggish and fail to reach their
winter homes. Migrations fail across the Americas. The trees in central Mexico mourn the loss of their winter shimmying clusters, and the
meadows, farms, and town gardens of the United States and southern
Canada are desolate in summer without the flitting shimmer of orange
and black.
For the child’s symbionts, Camille 1’s birthing parent chose monarch
butterflies of North America, in two magnificent but severely damaged
streams, from Canada to Mexico, and from the state of Washington,
along California, and across the Rocky Mountains. Camille’s gestational
parent exercised reproductive freedom with wild hope, choosing to bond
the soon-to-be-born fetus with both the western and eastern currents
of this braid of butterfly motion. That meant that Camille of the first
generation, and further Camilles for four more human generations at
least, would grow in knowledge and know-how committed to the on142



goingness of these gorgeous and threatened insects and their human
and nonhuman communities all along the pathways and nodes of their
migrations and residencies in these places and corridors, not all the time
everywhere. Camille’s community understood that monarchs as a widespread global species are not threatened; but two grand currents of a
continental migration, a vast connected sweep of myriad critters living
and dying together, were on the brink of perishing.
The child-bearing parent who chose the monarch butterfly as Camille’s
symbiont was a single person with the response-ability to exercise potent,
noninnocent, generative freedom that was pregnant with consequences
for ramifying worlds across five generations. That irreducible singularity, that particular exercise of reproductive choice, set in train a severalhundred-year effort, involving many actors, to keep alive practices of migration across and along continents for all the migrations’ critters. The
Communities of Compost did not align their children to “endangered
species” as that term had been developed in conservation organizations
in the twentieth century. Rather, the Communities of Compost understood their task to be to cultivate and invent the arts of living with and
for damaged worlds in place, not as an abstraction or a type, but as and
for those living and dying in ruined places. All the Camilles grew rich
in worldly communities throughout life, as work and play with and for
the butterflies made for intense residencies and active migrations with
a host of people and other critters. As one Camille approached death, a
new Camille would be born to the community in time so that the elder,
as mentor in symbiosis, could teach the younger to be ready.15
The Camilles knew the work could fail at any time. The dangers
remained intense. As a legacy of centuries of economic, cultural, and
ecological exploitation both of people and other beings, excess extinctions and exterminations continued to stalk the earth. Still, successfully
holding open space for other critters and their committed people also
flourished, and multispecies partnerships of many kinds contributed to
building a habitable earth in sustained troubled times.
The Camille Stories
The story I tell below tracks the five Camilles along only a few threads and knots
of their lifeways, between the birth of Camille 1 in 2025 and the death of Camillein 2425. The story I tell here cries out for collaborative and divergent story-making
practices, in narrative, audio, and visual performances and texts in materialities
the camille stories

from digital to sculptural to everything practicable. My stories are suggestive
string figures at best; they long for a fuller weave that still keeps the patterns
open, with ramifying attachment sites for storytellers yet to come. I hope readers
change parts of the story and take them elsewhere, enlarge, object, flesh out, and
reimagine the lifeways of the Camilles.
The Camille Stories reach only to five generations, not yet able to fulfill the
obligations that the Haudenosaunee Confederacy imposed on themselves and so
on anyone who has been touched by the account, even in acts of unacknowledged
appropriation, namely, to act so as to be response-able to and for those in the
seventh generation to come.16 The Children of Compost beyond the reach of the
Camille Stories might become capable of that kind of worlding, which somehow
once seemed possible, before the Great Acceleration of the Capitalocene and the
Great Dithering.
Over the five generations of the Camilles, the total number of human beings
on earth, including persons in symbiosis with vulnerable animals chosen by their
birth parent (syms) and those not in such symbioses (non-syms), declined from
the high point of 10 billion in 2100 to a stable level of 3 billion by 2400. If the
Communities of Compost had not proved from their earliest years so successful
and so infectious among other human people and peoples, the earth’s population
would have reached more than 11 billion by 2100. The breathing room provided by
that difference of a billion human people opened up possibilities for ongoingness
for many threatened ways of living and dying for both human and nonhuman
beings.17
CAMILLE
Born 2025. Human numbers are 8 billion.
Died 2100. Human numbers are 10 billion.

In 2020, about three hundred people with diverse class, racial, religious,
and regional heritages, including two hundred adults of the four major
genders practiced at the time18 and one hundred children under the age
of eighteen, built a town where the New River and Gauley River flowed
together to form the Kanawha River in West Virginia. They named the
settlement New Gauley to honor the lands and waters devastated by
mountaintop removal coal mining. Historians of this time have suggested that the period between about 2000 and 2050 on earth should
be called the Great Dithering.19 The Great Dithering was a time of ineffective and widespread anxiety about environmental destruction, un144




Monarch butterfly caterpillar Danaus plexippus on a milkweed pod.
Photograph by Singer S. Ron, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

mistakable evidence of accelerating mass extinctions, violent climate
change, social disintegration, widening wars, ongoing human population increase due to the large numbers of already-born youngsters (even
though birth rates most places had fallen below replacement rate), and
vast migrations of human and nonhuman refugees without refuges.
During this terrible period, when it was nonetheless still possible for
concerted action to make a difference, numerous communities emerged
across the earth. The English-language name for these gatherings was
the Communities of Compost; the people called themselves compostists.
Many other names in many languages also proposed the string figure
game of collective resurgence. These communities understood that the
Great Dithering could end in terminal crises; or radical collective action
could ferment a turbulent but generative time of reversals, revolt, revolution, and resurgence.
For the first few years, the adults of New Gauley did not birth any
new children, but concentrated on building culture, economy, rituals,
and politics in which oddkin would be abundant, and children would
be rare but precious.20 The kin-making work and play of the community built capacities critical for resurgence and multispecies flourishing.
In particular, friendship as a kin-making practice throughout life was
the camille stories

elaborated and celebrated. In 2025, the community felt ready to birth
their first new babies to be bonded with animal symbionts. The adults
judged that most of their already-born children, who had helped found
the community, were ready and eager to be older siblings to the coming
symbiont youngsters. Everybody believed that this kind of sympoiesis
had not been practiced anywhere on earth before. People knew it would
not be simple to learn to live collectively in intimate and worldly caretaking symbiosis with another animal as a practice of repairing damaged
places and making flourishing multispecies futures.
Camille 1 was born among a small group of five children, and per21 was
the only youngster linked to an insect. Other children in this first cohort became symbionts with fish (American eel, Anguilla rostrata), birds
(American kestrel, Falco sparverius), crustaceans (the Big Sandy crayfish,
Cambarus veteranus), and amphibians (streamside salamander, Ambystoma barbouri).22 Beginning with vulnerable bats, mammal symbioses
were undertaken in the second wave of births about five years later. It
was often easier to identify migratory threatened insects, fish, mammals,
and birds as potential symbionts for new children than reptiles, amphibians, and crustaceans. The preference for migratory symbionts was often
relaxed, especially since corridor conservation of all kinds was ever more
urgent as rising temperatures due to climate change forced many usually nonmigratory species outside their previous ranges. Although their
first loves remained traveling critters and far-flung pathways—mostly
because their own small human communities were made geographically
and culturally more worldly through cultivating the linkages required to
take care of their partners in symbiosis—some members of the Communities of Compost committed themselves to critters in tiny remnant
habitats, as well as to those whose finicky ecological requirements and
love of home tied them tightly to particular places only.23
Over the first hundred years, New Gauley welcomed 100 new births
with babies joined to animal symbionts, 10 births to single parents or
couples who declined the three-parent model and whose offspring did
not receive these sorts of symbionts, 200 deaths, 175 in-migrants, and
 out-migrants. The scientists of the Communities of Compost found it
impossible to establish successful animal-human symbioses with adults;
the critical receptive times for humans were fetal development, nursing,
and adolescence. During the times that they contributed cellular or molecular materials for modifying the human partner, the animal partners
also had to be in a period of transformation, such as hatching, larval


ecdysis, or metamorphosis. The animals themselves were not modified
with human material; their roles in the symbioses were to teach and to
flourish in every way possible in dangerous and damaged times.
Almost everywhere, the Communities of Compost committed themselves to maintaining their size or to growing through immigration,
while keeping their own new births at a level compatible with the earth’s
overall human numbers eventually declining by two-thirds. If new inmigrants accepted the basic practices of the Communities of Compost,
upon request they received permanent residency and citizenship rights
as compostists in inventive and usually raucous kin-making ceremonies.
Nonresident visitors were always welcome; hospitality was regarded as
both a basic obligation and source of mutual renewal. Visitors’ lengths
of stay could become a contentious matter and was even known to break
up kin affiliations and sometimes entire compostist communities.
If many more in-migrants wanted to join Communities of Compost
than were possible to accommodate, new settlements formed with mentors from the seed towns. In-migrants in the early centuries often came
from ruined areas elsewhere, and their seeking both refuge and belonging in the Communities of Compost—themselves committed to the arts
of living in damaged places—was an act of both desperation and faith.
The original founders of the Communities of Compost quickly realized
that in-migrants from desperate situations brought with them not only
trauma, but also extraordinary insight and skill for the work to be done.
Resettlement in still other ruined sites and establishment of alliances
and collaborations with people and other critters in those areas required
the best abilities of the mentors and the in-migrants. Plant symbionts
were not joined to babies in the Communities of Compost for several generations, although recognizing profuse sympoiesis—world making—
with plants was fundamental for all compostists.
New Gauley decided to emphasize in-migration of people over new
births for the first three generations, and after that time there was both
more flexibility and the need to recalibrate births and deaths. In- and
out-migration tended to equalize as more places on earth restored conditions for modest resurgence and reasons for seeking new homes rested
much less on war, exploitation, genocide, and ecological devastation,
and much more on adventure, curiosity, desire for new kinds of abundance and skill, and the old habits of human beings to move, including
hunter-gatherers, pastoralists, and farm-and-town-living people. Opportunistic social species tend to move around a lot; human beings outside
the camille stories

captivity have always been extraordinary ecosocial opportunists, travelers, and path makers. Added to that, by 2300, more than a billion human
beings on earth had themselves been born into new kinds of symbiotic
relationships with other critters, in addition to the much older multispecies associations that characterized human people as well as every other
sort of living being throughout ecological, evolutionary, developmental,
historical, and technological histories.
Before birth, Camille 1 was given a suite of pattern-forming genes expressed on monarch surfaces over their transformations from caterpillar
to winged adult. Camille 1 also received genes allowing per to taste in
the wind the dilute chemical signals crucial to adult monarchs selecting
diverse nectar-rich flowers and the best milkweed leaves for depositing
their eggs. Camille 1’s gut and mouth microbiomes were enhanced to
allow per to safely savor milkweed plants containing the toxic alkaloids
that the monarchs accumulate in their flesh to deter predators. As an
infant, Camille 1’s oral satisfactions with fragrant mammalian milk were
laced with the bitter tastes of cardiac glycosides, tastes that the human
parent nursing per dared not share. In per’s maturing mindful body, Camille 1 had to learn to become in symbiosis with an insect composed as
five caterpillar instars before metamorphosis into a flying adult, which
in turn experienced seasonally alternating sexually excited phases and
sexually quiet diapause. The symbiogenetic join of Camille and monarchs also had to accommodate the diverse parasitic and beneficial associates of the butterfly holobiont, as well as pay attention to the genetics
of the migrating populations.24
The compostists did not attempt to introduce into Camille 1’s already
complicated symbiotic reformatting any of the genes and timing patterns that the butterflies use to utterly disassemble and recompose their
entire being in the chrysalis before emerging as winged imagos. Nor
did the parents attempt to alter Camille’s visual capacities and neural
arrangements to perceive physically in the butterfly color spectrum, or
to see as if Camille had the compound eyes of an insect. Mimesis was
not the point of the alterations, but fleshly suggestions braided through
innovative pedagogical practices of naturalsocial becoming-with that
could help the symbiosis thrive through five human generations committed to healing damaged human and nonhuman lives and places. In
its most reductive expression, the point was to give the butterflies and
their people—to give the Migrations—a chance to have a future in a
time of mass extinctions.


By five years of age, Camille 1’s skin was brilliantly banded and colored in yellow and black like a late-stage monarch caterpillar, increasing
in intensity until age ten. But by initiation into adult responsibilities
at age fifteen, Camille 1’s skin had the muted tones and patterns of the
monarch chrysalis. As an adult, Camille 1 gradually acquired the pattern
and coloration of a vibrant orange and black adult butterfly. Camille 1’s
adult body was more androgynous in appearance than that of sexually
dimorphic monarch adults.
All of the symbiont children developed both visible traits and subtle sensory similarities to their animal partners in early childhood. Although they should not have been surprised, the consequences of this
developmental fact blindsided the adult compostists, as the first serious
conflicts in New Gauley erupted in the learning groups of the young.
Five youngsters who were bonded to animal symbionts, two children
born to dissenting parents, and so not bonded with such symbionts, and
five in-migrant children without symbionts made up the first cohort of
little ones. The symbiotic young were struggling to integrate mindful
bodies unimaginable to their parents. In addition, each symbiosis was
the only one of its kind in these early generations.
Camille 1 formed fierce friendships, especially with Kess, the youngster bonded with the American kestrels; but each symbiotic child was
acutely aware of their irreducible difference. Kess and Camille gravitated
to each other partly because they knew kestrels ate butterflies, and both
of their threatened animal symbionts flourished best in fields, meadows,
roadsides, pastures, and mixed woodlands full of a myriad of flowering
plants. From the beginning, the symbiont children developed a complex subjectivity composed of loneliness, intense sociality, intimacy with
nonhuman others, specialness, lack of choice, fullness of meaning, and
sureness of future purpose. This landscape of converging and diverging feelings tended to grade into arrogance and exceptionalism toward
the nonsymbiotic children, and even toward their parents and other
nonsymbiotic adults of New Gauley. Because symbionts were still rare
in the overall population of an area in the initial generations after the
first Communities of Compost were established, in vulnerable moments
nonsymbiotic children and adults could and did feel the symbionts were
freaks, both more-than- and other-than-human, and seriously threatening. Remembering that humanity meant humus, and not Anthropos or Homo, did not come easily in the webs of Western cultures that
predominated in New Gauley. Determined to help youngsters through
the camille stories

the mazes of self-preoccupation, social enthusiasm, playfulness, pride
in each other, fear, competition, and bullying that they had known in
school, the New Gauley adults and their young were faced with quite
another challenge in the emerging community of both symbiotic and
nonsymbiotic children.
New Gauley compostists soon found that storytelling was the most
powerful practice for comforting, inspiring, remembering, warning, nurturing compassion, mourning, and becoming-with each other in their
differences, hopes, and terrors. Of course, the Communities of Compost
emphasized a deep and wide range of approaches to educating both
young and old, and the sciences and arts were especially elaborated and
cherished. For youngsters and adults of most species in the communities, play was the most powerful and diverse activity for rearranging old
things and proposing new things, new patterns of feeling and action,
and for crafting safe enough ways to tangle with each other in conflict
and collaboration.25 The practice of friendship and the practice of play,
both ritualized and celebrated in small and large ways, were the core
kin-forming apparatuses. Libraries in many formats and materialities
abounded to evoke curiosities and sustain knowledge projects for learning to live and die well in the work of healing damaged places, selves,
and other beings. Decolonial multispecies studies (including diverse
and multimodal human and nonhuman languages) and an indefinitely
expandable transknowledging approach called EcoEvoDevoHistoEthnoTechnoPsycho (Ecological Evolutionary Developmental Historical Ethnographic Technological Psychological studies) were essential layered
and knotted inquiries for compostists.26
Compostists eagerly found out everything they could about experimental, intentional, utopian, dystopian, and revolutionary communities
and movements across times and places. One of their great disappointments in these accounts was that so many started from the premises of
starting over and beginning anew, instead of learning to inherit without
denial and stay with the trouble of damaged worlds. Although hardly
free of the sterilizing narrative of wiping the world clean by apocalypse or salvation, the richest humus for their inquiries turned out to
be sf —science fiction and fantasy, speculative fabulation, speculative
feminism, and string figures. Blocking the foreclosures of utopias, sf
kept politics alive.
So storytelling was the seed bag for flourishing for compostists, and
Camille 1 was fed on stories. Because the brave young princess loved the


toxic forest beings, especially the despised and feared insects called the
Ohmu, Camille’s favorite story was Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind. Like
a turbo butterfly, Nausicaä could fly over the forest, fields, and towns on
her agile personal jet-powered glider. The young Camille 1 could never
resist that vivid sensation. Hayao Miyazaki’s manga and anime story is
set on a postapocalyptic earth menaced by the toxic forest’s critters, who
were defending themselves and taking revenge for the natural world’s
relentless destruction at the hands of militarized, power-mad, technological humans. Evil rulers continued to promise ultimate destruction
in their drive to exterminate the toxic forest and extract the last drams
of resources for the walled cities of privilege and exception. Through
her study of the forest’s ecology, understanding of the physiology of
the mushroomlike infected poisonous trees, and love for the dangerous mutant giant insects and their larvae, Nausicaä triumphed in her
efforts to save both the people and the forest. She discovered that the
trees purified the toxins and drop by drop were forming a vast underground aquifer of pure water that could regenerate the biodiverse earth.
Attuned to the languages of the plants, fungi, and animals, Nausicaä
could calm the incomprehension and fear of the people who were poisoned by the toxic emanations of the disturbed forest. She could propose
peace between humans and other-than-humans because she befriended
the toxic forest, a practice that reached deep into the young Camille 1’s
psyche. In the dramatic concluding scenes of the story, at great risk to
herself, Nausicaä rescued a threatened larval Ohmu and so stopped the
stampede of its giant adult conspecifics in their rage at the humans’
capturing and wounding of the youngster.
Camille 1 learned that there were many inspirations for Miyazaki’s
story,27 including a Phaecian princess from Homer’s Odyssey named
Nausicaä, who loved nature and music, cultivated a fervid imagination,
and disdained possessions. Along with European medieval accounts of
witches’ mastery of the winds, Master Windkey from Ursula Le Guin’s
Earthsea also infused the Nausicaä tale. The adult Camille 1 thought that
the most generative inspiration, however, was a Japanese story from
the Heian period, called “The Princess Who Loved Insects.”28 The princess did not beautify herself by blackening her teeth or plucking her
eyebrows, and she scorned the idea of a husband. All her passions were
for the caterpillars and creeping crawling critters disdained by others.29
Nausicaä had a companion animal, really a symbiont, a fierce and
gentle little fox squirrel. In per’s memoir, the elder Camille 1 described
the camille stories

Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind as a fable of great danger and great
companionship. Unlike conventional heroes, Nausicaä accompanied by
animals, is a girl child and healer, whose courage matures in thick connection with many others and many kinds of others. Nausicaä cannot
act alone, and also her personal response-ability and actions have great
consequences for herself and for myriad human and nonhuman beings.
Nausicaä’s connections and corridors are practical and material, as well
as fabulous and enspirited in bumptious animist fashion. Hers are the
arts of living on a damaged planet. This twentieth-century Japanese
anime child sustained Camille 1 in symbiosis with the monarchs for a
lifetime.
CAMILLE
Born in 2085. Human numbers are 9.5 billion.
Died in 2185. Human numbers are 8 billion.

At initiation at age fifteen, as a coming-of-age gift the second Camille
decided to ask for chin implants of butterfly antennae, a kind of tentacular beard, so that more vivid tasting of the flying insects’ worlds could
become the heritage of the human partner too, helping in the work and
adding to the corporeal pleasures of becoming-with.30 Proud of this vibrant sign of the lived symbiosis now in its second generation, once the
procedures were complete the adolescent Camille 2 undertook a trip to
the overwintering habitat of the eastern migration to meet with indigenous people and campesinos who were rehabilitating damaged lands
and waters along the transvolcanic belt between the states of México
and Michoacán.
Camille 1 had been Camille 2’s mentor, and over the first fifteen years
of the new child’s life Camille 1 tried to prepare the second-generation
New Gauley human-butterfly symbiont for sustained visiting as the
guest of the diverse communities of Michoacán. But Camille 1’s lifework had been almost entirely along the corridors and in the towns,
fields, mines, woods, coasts, mountains, deserts, and cities of the great
eastern and western monarch migrations that are north of Mexico, into
southern Canada on the east and into Washington and the Northern
Rockies on the west. Camille 1 worked, played, and struggled primarily
with midwestern and southern farmers, agribusiness scientists, energy
companies and their ruthless lawyers, mine workers, unemployed peo152




Monarch butterfly resting on fennel in the Pismo Butterfly Grove near the
entrance to Pismo Beach State Park, November 15, 2008. Photograph
by docentjoyce / Wikimedia Commons.

ple, nature lovers, gardeners, corridor ecologists, insect specialists, and
climate scientists, as well as artists performing with and for nonhuman
critters. Although based in New Gauley and attuned especially to the
ravaged landscapes and peoples of coal country there and across the
continent,31 Camille 1 also sojourned with the insects and their people in
the winter homes of the western migration of the monarchs, especially
along the Monterey Bay of Central California. So per understood the
biological, cultural, historical worlds of these clusters of monarchs clinging to their local Monterey pines and crucial (if never really accepted by
ecological nativists) Australian gum trees.
Both sym and non-sym people across this vast expanse of land experienced the sympoieses of the Children of Compost primarily through
their biological semiotic materialities. Of course, as an important component of per’s education and working alliances as both child and adult, Camille 1 had studied with Native American, First Nation, and Métis teachers, who explained and performed diverse practices and knowledges for
conjoined human and other-than-human becoming and exchange. But
the camille stories

Camille 1 had never deeply questioned the settler practices or categories of nature, culture, and biology that made per’s own transformative
sympoiesis with monarchs comprehensible to perself. For practical and
political, as well as ontological and epistemological, reasons, Camillerecognized the urgent need both to deepen and to change the terms
of the exchanges and collaborations with people, peoples, and otherthan-human critters in the southern migrations and residencies of the
monarchs in Mexico.
And so, although well read in decolonial and postcolonial literatures
and engaged in lifelong correspondence with Mexican comrades, several
of whom had personally made the journey to New Gauley and to California’s Santa Cruz to meet with the Communities of Compost there,
Camille 1 died before encountering monarch sympoiesis in material semiotic forms other than symbiogenesis. Then, on the first Día de los
Muertos of per’s first sojourn in Mexico after coming of age, Camillewas introduced to the Monarcas returning to their winter mountain
home in November as the souls of the Mazahua dead. The Monarcas
did not represent the souls of the dead; they were syms of the living butterflies and the human dead, in multinaturalist worldings that Camille
 had studied but could barely recognize and did not know how to greet.
There were Communities of Compost in Michoacán and all over Mexico that had birthed symbiogenetic children for the work of rehabilitating ruined lands and waters through the coming generations. Mexicans
were as much at home in the extended apparatuses of naturalcultural,
biological knowledges and practices as their northern comrades. But
none of the Mexican Communities of Compost, no matter their settler, mixed, or native heritages, had joined a human baby to migrating
endangered critters that were themselves the visiting ancestors. The
consequences of Camille 2’s powerful introduction to the Monarca sympoiesis that joined the overwintering winged insects and the visiting
ancestors reshaped the fabric of work for ecojustice that joined New
Gauley and the communities of the transvolcanic belt for the coming
three hundred years. Searching for a term they could share, Camilleand per’s Mazahua hosts decided to name this kind of becoming-with
“symanimagenesis.” The corridors, migrations, and contact zones of the
monarchs collect up many ways of living and dying across the Americas!
Thus the Mazahuas of central Mexico (México, Michoacán, and Queretaro) became vital to Camille’s story from the second generation on.
Decolonial work on all sides of the border had to be intrinsic to every


form of sympoiesis with the monarchs.32 Struggling with the consequences for the Communities of Compost of practices of conservation
and restoration inherited from Anglo and Spanish settler colonialism
and of both the Mexican and U.S. states’ ongoing suppression of and
extraction from indigenous peoples, Camille 2 no longer could not know
about the Mazahuas’ land and water struggles, migrations to near and
distant cities for ill-paid work, customary and illegal forest cutting, charcoal making, history of acting to preserve the trees and woodlands before the butterfly migration became an international issue, history also
of old and new indigenous and outsider exploitation of the forest and
the watershed, and resistance to U.S. and other foreign scientists and
Mexican state regulations and bureaucrats that criminalize local subsistence practices in the butterfly preserve that became a World Heritage
Site.
In Camille 2’s first weeks in Mazahua monarch country, the women of
the communities in and around the butterfly reserve took per in hand.33
When the young sym arrived in autumn of 2100, the radical Mazahua
women were celebrating the ninety-sixth anniversary of the founding
of their movement. In 2004, “symbolically armed with farming tools
and wooden rifles, they formed el Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua and pledged a strategy of non-violence.”34 The Zapatista
movement had begun with a transformative armed uprising in Chiapas
on January 1, 1994, but the Zapatistas’ most important contribution to
the ongoing strategies of the Mazahuan communities was their development of vigorous nonviolence in a broad, multigenerational opposition
front.35 Communities of Compost all over the world studied Zapatistaheld municipalities called caracoles (snail shells).
Initiating the visiting New Gauley sym into intense relationships
with the living dead was the Mazahua women’s first priority. Politely
resisting the temptation to thread their fingers continuously though
the sensitive tentacular organs of their oddly bearded visitor, they were
charmed by the butterfly antennae on Camille 2’s chin and by per’s vividly colored adult skin patterns that had gradually replaced the dramatic
caterpillar skin banding of the younger child. The Mazahuas were confident that these markings signified that the adolescent would become an
apt student of their own human-butterfly worldings, and so a useful ally.
To join in the work of human and other-than-human rehabilitation and
multispecies environmental justice in indigenous territory, which had
been dominated and drained for centuries by the state and other outside
the camille stories

forces, Camille 2 had to study the resurgence of peoples that ignited in
the early years of the twenty-first century.
On the night the monarchas returned in November 2100, the women
taught Camille 2 a poem, “Soy Mazahua,” composed by Julio Garduño
Cervantes, which remained vital to their work for the dead and the living. The beautifully dressed people at the fiesta were singing the poem in
the midst of extravagant fireworks, feasting, and greeting returning kin.
The poem commemorated a Mazahua leader who had been murdered
in 1980 on the way home from a cemetery on el Día de los Muertos.
All over Mexico, this killing outraged indigenous pueblos and ignited a
movement that was stronger than ever by the time Camille 2 visited. The
women of El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua taught
that butterflies drank the tears of those who mourned the murdered,
raped, and disappeared ones of every land.36
You have wanted to deny my existence
But I do not deny yours.
But I exist. I am Mazahua.
...
I am made of this land, the air, water and sun.
And together we repeat, We are Mazahuas
...
You have enslaved my ancestors and stolen their lands. You have
murdered them.
...
I build the house but you live in it.
You are the criminal but I am in prison.
We made the revolution but you took advantage of it.
My voice rises and joins with a thousand others.
And together we repeat, We are Mazahuas
Our hands sowed for everyone.
Our hands will struggle for everyone.
I am Mazahua.
—Julio Garduño Cervantes

Camille 2 found it difficult at first to grasp how active the dead were
across this region and how critical to the work of compostists to restore
damaged land and its human and nonhuman beings.37 Camille 2 had to


learn to let go of colonialist notions of religion and secularism to begin
to appreciate the sheer semiotic materiality of those who came before.
Until sympoiesis with the dead could be acknowledged, sympoiesis with
the living was radically incomplete. Visiting urbanites from Mexico City
were no better at seriously engaging the epistemological, ontological,
and practical demands of this aspect of indigenous cosmopolitics than
Camille 2 was. Modernity and its category work proved terribly durable
for hundreds of years after the withering critique conducted in the late
twentieth and early twenty-first centuries had made explicit adherence
to the tenets of philosophical and political modernity unthinkable for
serious people, including scientists and artists. Modernity was driven
underground, but remained undead. Making peace with this vampire
ancestor was an urgent task for the Communities of Compost.38
In the early weeks of Camille2’s sojourn, the teenage Mazahua women
of El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua undertook the
task of teaching the sym about the struggle for water and forest ecojustice in the region. Throughout the late twentieth and twenty-first
centuries, in immense water transfer projects, Mexico City drew this
precious fluid from the lakes, rivers, and aquifers that reached across
the mountains and into the basins occupied by indigenous peoples and
other critters to the north and west.39 This practice was immensely destructive, a fact highlighted in a 2015 report of the Union of Scientists
Committed to Society, which argued, “Transferring water, moving large
volumes from one basin to another, is not only unsustainable and affects
the environment in the medium and long term, but also causes forced
displacements that destroy towns and communities and marginalize
people, who are obliged to move to the poverty belts of the large cities.”40
By the time of the birth of Camille 1, the Cutzamala System already
pumped 127 billion gallons per year to Mexico City and its twenty-seven
municipalities, while the Mazahua communities did not have potable
water. El Ejército de Mujeres Zapatistas en Defensa del Agua carried
out relentless demonstrations and actions in Mexico City and elsewhere
and won many partial victories. The struggle continued throughout
Camille 2’s lifetime and after. In sympoiesis, the monarch critters, human and other-than-human, drank from the healing tears of the living
and the dead.41

the camille stories


Mural painted by youth in La Hormiga, Putumayo, in southwestern
Colombia depicting landscapes before and after aerial fumigation during the
U.S.-Colombia “War on Drugs.” Photograph by Kristina Lyons.

CAMILLE
Born in 2170; human numbers are 8.5 billion.
Died in 2270; human numbers are 6 billion.

By this generation, two-thirds of the residents of the Communities of
Compost around the world were symbionts engaged in intense work
and play for sustaining vulnerable beings across the hardest centuries
of planetary crisis and widespread human and other-than-human suffering. A significant number of syms had decided to leave their compostist communities, surrendering residency rights for citizenship in
other political formations. Some humans, both in-migrants and nonsym offspring born in the new towns, became solid compostists without
ever wanting to engage personally in symbiogenetic kin making. Allied
with diverse non-sym peoples, compostist practices of living and dying
flourished everywhere, and the people in the emerging epoch of partial healing felt deeply entangled with the ongoing tentacular Chthulucene. There had been great losses of kinds of living beings, as rapid
climate change and interlocked ecosystem collapses swept the earth; and
the mass extinction event of the Capitalocene and Anthropocene was
not over.
Still, by the time Camille 3 was fifty years old, it was clear that human numbers, while still too heavy in most places for the damaged
natural, social, and technical systems of earth to sustain, were declining within a deliberate pattern of heightened environmental justice.
That pattern emphasized a preference for the poor among humans, a
preference for biodiverse naturalsocial ecosystems, and a preference
for the most vulnerable among other critters and their habitats. Much
of the most inventive work over the 150 years since the first compostist communities appeared was developing the linkages of this pattern.
That work required both powerful recognition and strengthening of
inherited Chthulucene practices that had not been fully obliterated in
the Capitalocene and Anthropocene, and also newly invented ways of
linking the three critical preferences to each other. The wealthiest and
highest-consuming human populations reduced new births the most,
with the support of the Communities of Compost; but human births
everywhere were deliberately below replacement rates, so as to slowly
and effectively reach levels that made sense for distributed and diverse

the camille stories

humanity as humus, rather than as end points of nature and culture.
Practices of making kin, not babies, had taken hold inside and outside
the Communities of Compost.
Against all expectations in the early twenty-first century, after only
 years sympoieses, both symbiogenetic and symanimagenic, seemed
to be making a difference in holding open time and space for many of
earth’s most vulnerable, including the monarch migrations and their
diverse human people and peoples. Forests in the transvolcanic belt of
Mexico were resurgent, and water had been restored to the pillaged aquifers. People had worked out robust peace with the critters and scientists
of the Biosphere Reserve, as greater control was relocated to campesino and indigenous organizations for environmental justice. Migrations
north of Mexico now could count on larval and adult food as nonmonocropping organic agriculture, ubiquitous gardens, and species-rich roadside verges filled the landscape. Devastation of habitats for people and
other critters caused by Big Energy and Big Capital was not finished, but
the tide had definitively turned.
Humus-friendly technological innovation, creative rituals and celebrations, profound economic restructuring, reconfiguration of political
control, demilitarization, and sustained work for connecting corridors
and for ecological, cultural, and political restoration had all made an
impact and were growing in force. While Camille 3 could not forget the
monarchs, per’s attention was turned to the fact that syms needed to
take stock of themselves collectively in unprecedented ways.
The major events of Camille 3’s life were travels to gatherings around
the world of sym and non-sym humans in the face of general recognition
that both humanity and animality had been fundamentally transformed
by compostist practices. Of course, many peoples of earth had never divided living beings into human and animal; nonetheless, they had all ordered things differently from what was plainly happening everywhere by
. It was also inescapably clear by 2200 that the changes were not the
same everywhere. Sym worlding was not one thing, and it was diverging and adapting exuberantly in EcoEvoDevoHistoTechnoEthnoPsycho
fashion. The recognition was turbulent, exhilarating, and dangerous.
The crises of bullying among the children in Camille 1’s generation were
nothing to the terrors of transition in the third generation of the Communities of Compost, who would in a few more generations become the
majority of people on earth. Inventing earthwide cosmopolitics between




Kenojuak Ashevak, Animals of Land and Sea, 1991, stonecut with stencil,
 = 30 in. (paper). Courtesy of Dorset Fine Arts.

and among syms and non-syms was the daunting task of Camille 3’s
generation.
Peoples from every fold of earth had long been both generated and
nourished by stories, myths, performances, powers, and embodiments
of entities not divided into categories recognizable to most conventional
Western philosophy and politics. Such stories and embodiments were
also deeply embedded in the practices and accounts of both recent and
long-established peoples living throughout what was once called the
West. Camille 3’s generation found biologies and storytelling to be the
richest veins for weaving the needed fabrics to bind syms and non-syms
together.
Coming-of-age stories in sf, from Joanna Russ’s Alyx in The Adventures of Alyx to Julie Czerneda’s decidedly nonhumanoid young female
entity Esen-alit-Quar in her Web Shifters series, entranced many in Camille 3’s generation, and these tales had been carefully maintained in the

the camille stories

compostist archives. Camille 3 was especially drawn to Philip Pullman’s
twentieth-century stories about the young girl Lyra Belacqua and her
daemon, Pantalaimon.42 The animal daemons of human beings were capable of multiple transformations until the time of human adolescence,
when the animal stabilized into a single morph. Pullman imagined the
daemons as expressions of a tripartite human person, rather than as a
distinct beings; but compostist syms had other and better resources for
understanding the join, which did not rely on the trinary soul/body
mind heritage that Pullman used in his war against both monotheism
and the Authority. Compostists understood the daemons in less ontologically purified ways, more entangled with situated animisms in diverse modern and traditional, past and present worlds. The bonds between human and daemon were very close to the symbiogenetic linkages
forged for the young in compostist communities. Severing such bonds
threatened persons at the deepest core of their being. Living-with was
the only possible way to live-well. Heartened by these stories between
and during endless meetings among quibbling and not infrequently
fearful syms and non-syms, the critters of earth were forging planetwide
ontological revolutions for making kin.
CAMILLE
Born in 2255. Human numbers are 6.5 billion.
Died in 2355. Human numbers are 3.5 billion.

After decades of heartening progress, new viral diseases afflicting soilbased fungal symbionts of food plants needed by many species in the
subfamily Danainae to fight off their own protozoan parasites emerged
earthwide too quickly for response.43 The monarchs joined the myriad
kinds of beings that disappeared in the ongoing great extinctions
that had been unloosed by the Plantationocene, Anthropocene and
Capitalocene. Near the end of life, witnessing the loss of the great
monarch migrations across the Americas, and with them the loss of
the patterns of living and dying they sustained, Camille 4 knew that
mentoring Camille 5 would take other paths than those that had guided
Camille 3’s teaching of Camille 4.
In a diary archived by the compostists, Camille 4 wrote about per’s
wrenching feelings in 2340 at the age of eighty-five, while watching the




The relations of infectious disease and parasitism are not the enemies of
earth’s critters; the killing of ongoingness—double death—is the crime. “When
monarch butterflies are heavily infected with the protozoan parasite Ophryocystis
elektroscirrha, they can sometimes get stuck to their chrysalis. In this case, a paper
wasp takes advantage of the situation.” Photograph and description by Jaap de
Roode, Emory University.

celebrations for fifteen-year-old Camille 5’s initiation into full sym responsibilities. Involved for decades in research on the ecologies of the
insects in their human and nonhuman holobiomes, Camille 4 had been
studying the reports from all over the earth about the rapid population
crashes of moths and butterflies, especially among the Danainae. Although widespread and diverse, monarchs would be among the first to
disappear; and no one yet knew why. It was not clear that total extinction would result, but it was clear the migrations were doomed. Holding
open space would involve much different work for Camille 5 than for the
previous generations, and it was Camille 4’s hard task to take the young
sym through another sort of initiation before dying in 2355. Of course,
Camille 4 had a great deal of experience to draw from with other syms
who had lost their critters.

the camille stories


Make Kin Not Babies. Design by Elaine Gan for the
exhibit dump! at Kunsthal Aarhus, 2015.

There were thousands of Speakers for the Dead around the earth
by 2300, each tasked with bringing critters who had been irretrievably
lost into potent presence for giving knowledge and heart to all of those
continuing to work for the still diverse earth’s robust and partial recuperation.44 Over three hundred years, the Communities of Compost
had built a potent earthwide network of refugia and foci of resurgent
naturalcultural diversity. The Speakers for the Dead teach practices of
remembering and mourning that enlist extinct human and nonhuman
critters in the ongoing work of cutting the shackles of Double Death,
which strangled a vast proportion of ways of living and dying in the
Plantationocene, Anthropocene and Capitalocene.45
For help in preparing Camille 5 to take up the tasks of a Speaker for
the Dead, Camille 4 turned to the Canadian-Nunavut, nontraditional,
young Inuk woman throat singer Tanya Tagaq and her 2014 album
Animism, which had been so powerful in strengthening Inuit and also
other situated resurgence in the twenty-first century. Tagaq practiced
what a twenty-first-century anthropologist, Susan Harding, tentatively
called “experimental animism.”46 In Animism, Tagaq and her partners,



violinist Jesse Zubot and drummers Jean Martin and DZ Michael Red,
performed a musical argument for and about continuities, transformations, contradictions, and sf visual and acoustic kinetic interconversions of human and animal beings in situated worlds. Hunting, eating,
living-with, dying-with, and moving-with in the turbulent folds and eddies of a situated earth: these were the affirmations and controversies
of Tagaq’s singing and website texts and interviews. Tagaq embraced
oppositions and conflicts, not to purify them, but to live inside complexities of shared flesh, casting herself for some worlds and not others.
At her Polaris Music Prize performance in September 2014, the names
of murdered and missing Aboriginal women scrolled behind Tagaq. The
last track of Animism was titled “Fracking”; the first was “Caribou.” She
wore seal fur cuffs during her Polaris performance; she affirmed the
natural world and hunting by her people. Her risk-taking animism performed materialist worlds—gone, here, and to come. Proclaiming, “I
want to live in worlds that are not supposed to be,” she affirmed that
such worlds already are, have been, and will be.47 The music was utterly
contemporary, and many mobile identities were in play and at risk. The
work reached out to unexpected techniques and audiences; and it was
unapologetically rooted in specific places, peoples, and critters.
Tagaq’s practices of transforming sound, flesh, and kind were animist
in old and new Inuit terms and in the related sense proposed by the
anthropologist Eduardo Viveiros de Castro. Viveiros de Castro studied
with Brazilian Amerindians, with whom he learned to theorize the radical conceptual realignment he called multinaturalism and perspectivism. “Animism is the only sensible version of materialism.”48 It matters
which concepts conceptualize concepts. Materialist, experimental animism is not a New Age wish nor a neocolonial fantasy, but a powerful
proposition for rethinking relationality, perspective, process, and reality
without the dubious comforts of the oppositional categories of modern
traditional or religious/secular. Human-animal knots do something different in this world.
It matters which worlds world worlds. It matters who eats whom
and how. It remains a material question for cosmopolitical critters in
the Communities of Compost. For these reasons, Camille 4 invoked
Tanya Tagaq to share her power more than two hundred years after her
death.

the camille stories

CAMILLE
Born 2340. Human numbers are 4 billion.
Died in 2425. Human numbers are 3 billion.
One billion human-critter symbionts inhabit the earth in 2425.
Two billion humans are not syms.
Over 50 percent of all critter species living inhave vanished by 2425.
Millions of kinds of critters are syms with humans.
The animal sym partners remain unaltered by human genes.
The human syms take on ever more properties
of their animal partners.
Many humans are syms with extinct partners.
STARHAWK’S SONG, TAUGHT BY THE SPEAKERS FOR THE DEAD

Breathe deep.
Feel the pain
where it lives deep in us
for we live, still,
in the raw wounds
and pain is salt in us, burning.
Flush it out.
Let the pain become a sound,
a living river on the breath.
Raise your voice.
Cry out. Scream. Wail.
Keen and mourn
for the dismembering of the world.49
And so the fifth Camille inherited a powerful task from per’s mentor—to
become a Speaker for the Dead, to bring into ongoing presence, through
active memory, the lost lifeways, so that other symbiotic and sympoietic commitments would not lose heart. Crucial to the work was not to
forget the stink in the air from the burning of the witches, not to forget
the murders of human and nonhuman beings in the Great Catastrophes
named the Plantationocene, Anthropocene, Capitalocene, to “keen and
mourn for the dismembering of the world.” Moving through mourning
to represencing, to the practice of vital memory, was the work of the
Speakers for the Dead. Their task was to strengthen the healing that was
gaining momentum across the earth. The fourth and fifth Camilles both



Monarch butterfly caterpillars regularly have to share
their milkweed food plants with oleander aphids (Aphis nerii).
© Jaap de Roode, Emory University.

traveled widely, drawing from their heritage of monarch symbioses, to
teach and learn how to practice healing and ongoingness in the cyclones
of continuing damage and partial resurgence.
Before taking up the tasks of the Speaker for the Dead, remembering
the bonds formed more than two hundred years earlier, Camille 5 again
sought help from the evolving, historically situated, symanimagenic kinmaking practices of twenty-fourth-century Mazahuas. Camille 5 began
per’s work with a year-long residence in Michoacán studying with the overlapping indigenous-scientific-activist communities that continued to heal
damaged lives and lands there. The Mazahuas also mourned the loss of

the living monarchs, and they were deeply worried how this extinction
would reshape their own symanimagenic relations with their dead. By
Camille 5’s generation, there were millions of vanished species, vanished
kinds of critters both human and other-than-human, and so much for
the Speakers for the Dead to do to replenish heart and mind for and
with those who continue to stay with the trouble. And to stay with the
ragged joy of ordinary living and dying, up to and beyond the year 2400.
The monarchs’ people decided that this Speaker for the Dead should
itself be a new kind of sym, joining the symbiogenetic Camille 5 with
symanimagenic persons from the transvolcanic belt. Such persons had
the camille stories

been friends and coworkers before; now they were to undertake another
experimental and risky sympoiesis for unfurling times.
The Speakers for the Dead are also tasked with bringing into mind
and heart the new things of earth, not only the symbionts and symanimants and their communities and corridors, but also the emerging
kinds of beings and ways of life of an always evolving home world. The
Speakers for the Dead seek and release the energies of the past, present, and future Chthulucene, with its myriad tentacles of opportunistic,
dangerous, and generative sympoiesis. The Children of Compost would
not cease the layered, curious practice of becoming-with others for a
habitable, flourishing world.




